# Character Rules

Cepheus Engine SRD 5 Samardan Pre ss CHAPTER 5: PE RSONAL COMBAT........................... 89 Personal Combat Checklist................................. 89 Range.................................................................. 89 Starting Range................................................ 89 Initiative............................................................. 90 The Combat Round............................................ 90 Dynamic Initiative.......................................... 90 Minor Actions..................................................... 90 Aiming............................................................ 90 Aiming for the Kill.......................................... 90 Changing Stance............................................. 90 Drawing and Reloading.................................. 91 Movement..................................................... 91 Miscellaneous................................................ 91 Signi ficant Actions.............................................. 91 Minor Actions................................................ 91 Miscellaneous................................................ 91 Attack............................................................. 91 Coup de Grace............................................... 92 Reactions............................................................ 92 Dodging.......................................................... 92 Parrying.......................................................... 92 Other Actions..................................................... 92 Free Actions................................................... 92 Extended Actions........................................... 92 Delay.............................................................. 93 Special Considerations....................................... 93 Battlefield Comms......................................... 93 Battlefield Conditions.................................... 93 Battlefield Sensors......................................... 93 Blind Firing..................................................... 94 Burst Fire........................................................ 94 Cover.............................................................. 94 Explosions...................................................... 95 Extreme Range Firing..................................... 95 Fighting in Zero Gravity................................. 95 Firing into Combat........................................ 95 Grappling....................................................... 95 Panic Fire....................................................... 95 Shotgun Spread............................................. 96 Suppression Fire............................................ 96 Stance............................................................ 96 Tactics and L eadership.................................. 96 Thrown Weapons.......................................... 97 Damage............................................................. 97 Armor............................................................ 97 Fatigue.......................................................... 97 Unconsciousness........................................... 97 Injury and Recovery........................................... 97 Natural Healing............................................. 98 Medical Treatment....................................... 98 Healing and Mental Characteristics.............. 98 Vehicles in Personal Combat............................. 98 Closed and Open Vehicles............................. 98 Vehicle -Mounted Weapons.......................... 99 Collisions....................................................... 99 Vehicular Actions.......................................... 99 Vehicle Damage.......................................... 100 Repairs........................................................ 102 Ground Force Weaponry against Starship -scale Targets............................................................. 102 BOOK TWO: STARSHIPS AND INTERSTELLAR TRAVEL............................................................................. 103 CHAPTER 6: OFF -WORLD TRAVEL........................ 104 Interplanetary Travel....................................... 104 Interstellar Travel............................................ 104 Jump Success Roll....................................... 105 Jump Failures and Misjumps....................... 105 Starship Operations......................................... 105 Ship’s Passage............................................. 106

Cepheus Engine SRD 9 Samardan Pre ss World Population............................................. 170 Population Modifier..................................... 171 Primary Starport............................................... 171 World Government.......................................... 172 Law Level.......................................................... 172 Technology Level.............................................. 173 Trade Codes...................................................... 173 Planetoid Belt Presence................................... 174 Gas Giant Presence.......................................... 174 Bases................................................................ 174 Naval Base.................................................... 174 Scout Base.................................................... 175 Pirate Base................................................... 175 Base Codes................................................... 175 Travel Zones..................................................... 175 Amber Zone................................................. 175 Red Zone...................................................... 175 Polities and World Allegiance.......................... 175 Communications Routes and Trade Routes..... 175 CHAPTER 13: PLA NETARY WILDERNESS ENCOUNTERS........................................................ 177 Animal Encounters........................................... 177 Animals and Characteristics......................... 177 Planetary Themes........................................ 177 Step One: Choose a Terrain......................... 177 Step Two: Determine the Animal’s Type and Subtype........................................................ 178 Step Three: Note Modifiers and Skills by Subtype........................................................ 178 Step Four: Determine Animal Size and Characteristics............................................. 179 Step Five: Determine Animal’s Weapons, Armor and Base Speed................................ 180 Universal Animal Format.................................. 182 Animals in Combat........................................... 183 Creating Encounter Tables............................... 183 Using the Encounter Tables............................. 184 Animal Reactions in Encounters...................... 184 CHAPTER 14: SOCIAL ENCOUNTERS.................... 186 Routine Encounters......................................... 186 Scenario Encounters........................................ 186 Random Encounters........................................ 186 Legal Encounters............................................. 187 Patron En counters........................................... 188 Format for Patron Encounters.................... 189 Bruce Ayala, Interplanetary Playboy........... 189 Rumors............................................................ 190 Influencing Attitudes....................................... 191 CHA PTER 15: STARSHIP ENCOUNTERS................ 192 Encounter Range............................................. 192 Space Encounter Descriptions......................... 192 CHAPTER 16: REFEREEING THE GAME................. 196 Rule Zero......................................................... 196 Gaming Style.................................................... 196 Improvisation.................................................. 197 Improvisational Preparation....................... 197 Recycling Game Material............................ 198 Running the Game........................................... 198 Assigning Difficulties................................... 198 Modifying the Roll or the Difficulty............. 198 Circumstance Modifiers.............................. 199 Automatic Successes................................... 199 Using Opposed Checks................................ 199 That’s not in the Rules..................................... 199 Solo Play as Referee Prep Work...................... 199 Character Creation...................................... 200 Personal Combat......................................... 200 Starship Construction.................................. 200 Space Combat............................................. 200 Subsector Creation...................................... 200 Animal Encounter Creation......................... 200

Cepheus Engine SRD 12 Samardan Pre ss The Characters A player character or playable character (PC) is a fictional character in a C epheus Engine game whose actions are directly controlled by a player of the game rather than the rules of the game. The characters that are not controlled by a player are called non -player characters (NPCs). The actions of non -player characters are typical ly handled by the Referee. Using the Cepheus Engine rules as guidelines, a player will create a character reflecting the sort of role they’d like to have in the game. The character is usually of a certain race (depending on those available with the Refere e's universe) and possesses a unique combination of skills and levels of expertise. The attributes of a character is given as numerical values which can change as the gamer progresses, and characters grow and develop over the course of their adventures. Characteristics All characters have certain basic characteristics that define what they are capable of doing. These characteristics are Strength, Dexterity, Endurance, Intelligence, Education, and Social Standing. They each have a numeric characteristic sco re, averaging 7 for a normally capable human. Higher characteristic scores grant bonuses (+1 or more) on task resolution checks, while lower characteristic scores grant penalties (as low as -2). As part of creating your character, you decide how strong, sm art, and tough your character is by choosing the appropriate characteristic scores. See Chapter 1: Character Creation for more information. Careers As a part of their development, characters follow certain life paths called careers. The Cepheus Engine pr ovides a variety of career options for characters to pursue, which opens up opportunities for characters to gain skill levels, characteristic boosts and significant mustering out benefits before they enter into play. See Chapter 1: Character Creation for m ore information. Skills Skills represent training in a particular sort of task or knowledge, everything from acrobatic maneuvers to negotiation, piloting a starship, and programming a computer. Someone trained in athletics is able to climb faster and with more confidence than someone who isn't, for example. Skills are measured in levels, reflecting how much trainin g a character has in the skill. When recording skills and their associated levels, the skill name is written first, followed by a hyphen, and th en the number of levels that the character possesses in that skill. For example, Gambling -2 means that the character has two levels of Gambling skill. Each skill level represents roughly two years’ worth of education and training in that skill. For skills of an academic bent, you could equate that to an Associate's Degree (or similar two -year academic program) at level one, a Bachelor's Degree (or other four -year program) at level two, a Master's Degree at level three, a Doctorate at level four, and so on. Skill levels act as a bonus on task resolutions rolls when a character attempts an action related to a skill. As your character follows their career, they gain skills. See Chapter 2: Skills for more information on specific skills. Game Play Playing a sess ion using the Cepheus Engine rules resembles verbally acting out chapters from a science fiction novel. Game sessions can last from short sessions of an hour or two, up to marathon games covering most of a weekend. The average game session tends to run thr ee to five hours, however. Over the course of a session, the player -characters pursue their adventures. Some resolve quickly, within a single session, while others may take place in multiple acts spread out over several sessions. Each adventure is like its very own story, consisting of a series of scenes that are explored during play. In general, most scenes are simply the players interacting with the non -player characters and the universe created

Cepheus Engine SRD 18 Samardan Pre ss Jump point: A point in space more than 100 diameters out from any nearby celestial body, chosen by a navigator as the point from which a ship will enter into Jump space. Jump space: The alternate dimension through which starships travel when transiti oning from one point in normal space to another. Lesser race: A sentient species that has not developed jump drive technology on its own. While individuals of the Lesser races can and do engage in interstellar travel, settled populations of any given Lesse r Race are rarely encountered further than ten parsecs from their homeworld. Lethal damage: Damage that can potentially disable or kill a target. Mainworld: The primary world of a star system; the world represented by the UWP in a list of worlds for a give n region of space. Melee attack: A physical attack in close combat. Melee weapon: A handheld weapon designed for close combat. Minor action: An action intended to move a distance or to manipulate or move an object. You can take up to three minor actions pe r round, at the loss of a significant action. Misjump: A mishap caused by an inaccurate jump, which results in jumping to a random location with damage to the vessel and potentially the crew. Common causes for misjumps include bad Jump plots, damaged Jump drives, diverting energy into the Jump drive improperly, jumping from within the hundred -diameter limit and using unrefined fuel. Modifier: Any bonus or penalty applied to a die roll. Natural: A natural result on a roll or check is the actual number appear ing on the die, not the modified result obtained by adding bonuses or subtracting penalties. Non -lethal damage: Damage that can potentially stun or knock out a target, but does no permanent harm. Non -player character (NPC): A character controlled by the Re feree (as opposed to a character controlled by a player). Non -starship: A spaceship without a jump drive, and thus incapable of interstellar travel on its own. Patron: A non -player character who gives financial or other support to a person, o rganization, c ause, or activity. Referees often use patrons as a tool to attempt to engage player characters in adventures. Penalty: A negative modifier to a die roll. Player character (PC): A character controlled by a player, one of the protagonists of an adventure or campaign. Psion: A character with psionic abilities. Ranged attack: Any attack made at a distance. Ranged weapon: A projectile or thrown weapon designed for attacking at a distance. Reaction: An action taken in response to the action of another. You can pe rform as many reactions as you want per round in Personal Combat, but the number of Reactions that a vessel can undertake is based on Initiviative in Space Combat. Referee: The player who portrays characters not controlled by the other players, arbitrates the rules, and makes up the story and setting for the game. Rimward: An astrographical term indicating the direction opposite of Coreward, or directly away from the radio source of Sagittarius A *. Round: A six -second unit of game time used to manage action s, usually in combat. Significant action: An action intended to do something within about 3 seconds. You can perform a single significant action per round, or forego it to perform a total of three minor actions. Seriously wounded: If you have lost at least one point from all three of your physical characteristics, you are considered seriously wounded. When conscious, you cannot move except to hobble or crawl along at 1.5 meters per combat round. You also lose your minor action in combat. You can only regain characteristic points equal to your Endurance DM per day of rest through natural healing. You require surgery.

Cepheus Engine SRD 21 Samardan Pre ss CHAPTE R 1: CHARACTER CREATION Cepheus Engine characters are rarely beginners fresh from the farm. There is no reason not to play a young and inexperienced character if you like, but since a broad range of skills is important to success in the game most players w ill want their character to be a little more experienced in the world. All characters begin at the age of majority, typically 18. Having generated characteristic scores and background skills, the character should begin serving terms in his or her chosen ca reer. Each 4 -year term spent in a career gives the character more experience in the universe, generally in the form of skills. Generate the results of each term before proceeding to the next. At the end of a period of service, characters roll for benefits gained upon "mustering out" (i.e. leaving the service). They may then begin adventuring. This chapter provides complete instructions for the generation of twenty -four distinct career paths. Character Creation Checklist 1) Characteristics a) Roll your six characteristics using 2 D6, and place them in order on your character sheet. b) Determine characteristic modifiers. 2) Home world (Optional) a) Determine home world. b) Gain background skills. Character gains a number of background skills at Level 0 equal to 3 + their Education modifier. The first two have to be taken from your home world (based on the world's trade codes or law level ); the rest are taken from the education list. 3) Career a) Choose a career. You cannot choose a career you’ve already left excep t Drifter. b) Roll to qualify for that career, as indicated in the description of the career. If this is not your first career, you suffer a –2 DM for every previous career in which you have served. c) If you qualify for this career, go to step 4. d) If yo u do not qualify for that career, you can enter the Drifter career or submit to the draft. You may only enter the draft once. 4) Basic training For your first term in your first career, you get every skill in the service skills table at level 0. For your f irst term in subsequent careers, you may pick any one skill from the service skills table at level 0. 5) Survival Roll for survival, as indicated in the description of the career. If you succeed, go to step 8. If you did not succeed, you have died. Alterna tely, events have forced you from this career. Roll on the mishap table and go to step 10 (you do not receive a benefit roll for this term.) 6) Commission and Advancement a) You begin as a Rank 0 character. b) If your career offers a Commission check and you are Rank 0, you can choose to roll for Commission. If you are successful, you are now Rank 1 in your chosen career. Choose one of the skills and training tables and roll on it for an extra skill. Take any bonus skills from the ranks table for this care er. c) If your career offers an Advancement check and you are Rank 1 or higher, you can choose to roll for Advancement. If you are successful, your Rank improves by one in your chosen career. Choose one of the skills and training tables and roll on it for an extra skill. Take any bonus skills from the ranks table for this career. You can roll for Advancement in the same term that you succeed in a Commission roll. 7) Skills and Training

Cepheus Engine SRD 22 Samardan Pre ss a) Choose one of the Skills and Training tables for this career and ro ll on it. If you gain a characteristic improvement as a result, apply the change to your characteristic score immediately. If you gain a skill as a result and you do not already have levels in that skill, take it at level 1. If you already have the skill, increase your skill by one level. b) If your career does not have a Commission or Advancement check, you may roll a second time, choose one of the Skills and Training tables for this career (which may be the same or different from the first table chosen fo r this term.) 8) Aging a) Increase your age by 4 years. b) If your character is 34 or older, roll for aging. 9) Re -enlistment a) Roll for re -enlistment. If you fail, you must leave this career. If you roll a natural 12, you cannot leave this career and mus t continue for another term, go to step 5. b) If you have served a total of seven terms or more in character creation, then you must retire, go to step 10. c) If you wish to continue in this career, go to step 5. d) If you wish to leave this career, go to step 10. 10) Benefits If you are leaving the career, roll for benefits. A character gets one Benefit Roll for every full term served in that career. You also get extra benefit rolls if you reached a higher rank. 11) Next Career If you’re leaving your curre nt career and your total number of terms in character creation is less than seven, you may go to step 3 to choose a new career or to step 1 2 if you wish to finish your character. 12) Buy starting equipment Purchase y our starting equipment and, if you can a fford it, possibly a starship. Characteristics Characteristics measure a character’s most basic abilities: how strong, dexterous, educated or intelligent he is. Characteristic scores influence almost everything your character does. Stronger characters can lift greater weights, more dexterous characters have better balance, and so forth. Characters have six abilities: Strength (Str), Dexterity (Dex), Endurance (End), Intelligence (Int), Education (Edu), and Social Standing (Soc). Strength, Dexterity, and E ndurance are called physical abilities, whereas Intelligence, Education, and Social Standing are loosely termed mental abilities. Each above -average ability score provides a bonus on certain die rolls; while below average abilities apply a penalty to some die rolls. The six characteristics for your character are briefly described as follows: • Strength (Str): A character’s physical strength, fitness and forcefulness. • Dexterity (Dex): Physical co -ordination and agility, reflexes. • Endurance (End): A character ’s ability to sustain damage, stamina and determination. • Intelligence (Int): A character’s intellect and quickness of mind. • Education (Edu): A measure of a character’s learning and experience. • Social Standing (Soc): A character’s place in society. Soci al Standing and Noble Titles In a Cepheus Engine universe where characters of sufficiently high Social Standing characteristic scores are considered nobility, specific values of Social Standing are often associated with specific titles of nobility. The Titles of Nobility by Social Standing table captures some examples, but actual values may vary from universe to universe. Versions of these titles traditionally given to the female gender are provided in parentheses.

Cepheus Engine SRD 23 Samardan Pre ss Table: Titles of Nobility by Social Stand ing Social Standing Title of Nobility 10 (A) Lord (Lady) 11 (B) Knight (Knightess, Dame) 12 (C) Baron (Baroness), Baronet 13 (D) Marquis (Marquesa, Marchioness) 14 (E) Count (Countess) 15 (F) Duke (Duchess) 16 (G) Archduke (Archduchess) 17 (H) Crow n Prince (Crown Princess) 18 (J) Emperor (Empress) Psionic Strength, the Seventh Characteristic Within the Cepheus Engine, characters can sometimes have a seventh characteristic score. When a character learns psionics, they generate a Psionic Strength c haracteristic (abbreviation Psi), which powers their psionic talents. This characteristic cannot be rolled or bought during character creation without the Referee’s permission. For more information on this topic, see Chapter 3: Psionics. Generating Charac teristic Scores Generating characteristics scores is fairly straightforward. Roll your six characteristics using 2 D6, and record them in the standard order: Strength (Str), Dexterity (Dex), Endurance (End), Intelligence (Int), Education (Edu), and Social S tanding (Soc). Optional Rule: With the Referee’s approval, roll 2D6 six times, and assign the results to the six different characteristic scores based on a particular character concept. For example, if you picture your character as a highly -educated resear cher, then you might assign your highest result to Education, and assign your second highest to Intelligence. Characteristic Score Limits: For player characters, a characteristic score may not typically exceed a maximum of 15, nor may a score drop permanen tly below 1 except under certain circumstances. Characteristic Modifiers Once you have assigned your characteristic scores, you can determine your characteristic modifiers. These modifie rs are applied to any check when you do something related to that cha racteristic. An ability score modifier is calculated by dividing the ability score by three, dropping all fractions, and then subtracting one, so that the average characteristic score of 7 has a DM+0. Thus, a characteristic value of 2 or less has a modifie r of DM-2, characteristic values of 3 to 5 have a modifier of DM -1, and so on. The Characteristic Modifier by Score Range table provides a synopsis of these modifiers, already calculated for you.

Cepheus Engine SRD 24 Samardan Pre ss Table: Characteristic Modifier by Score Range Score Range PseudoHex Characteristic Modifier 0 through 2 0-2 -2 3 through 5 3-5 -1 6 through 8 6-8 +0 9 through 11 9-B +1 12 through 14 C-E +2 15 through 17 F-H +3 18 through 20 J-L +4 21 through 23 M-P +5 24 through 26 Q-S +6 27 through 29 T-V +7 30 thr ough 32 W-Y +8 33 or higher Z +9 Altering Characteristic Scores Over the course of play, your character's characteristic scores may change for the following reasons: • Aging can permanently lower physical characteristic scores. • Physical damage, such as fr om combat, falling, disease or poison, temporarily lowers physical characteristic scores. • Mental trauma, such as head injuries and psionic attack, temporarily lowers mental characteristic scores. • Certain medications, psionic enhancements, and other scenari os can temporarily or permanently enhance specific characteristic scores. Whenever a characteristic score changes, you will need to determine the new characteristic modifier. On Gender and Race The core Cepheus Engine rules make no distinctions between d ifferent members of the same species, regardless of gender or race. In the realm of classic science fiction literature, heroes came in many different flavors and capacities, and were generally un hindered by their gender or the color of their skin. Alien sp ecies may have additional gender choices that can impact a character’s characteristic scores and grant specific abilities or traits based on gender selection. For example, if an insectoid species has four genders (queen, soldier, worker and drone), each mi ght grant different characteristic bonuses or penalties that impact character creation. The definition of alien species lies in the realm of the Referee’s powers of creativity, as befits the nature of their campaign and universe. On Alien Species and Soci al Standing Alien species may have different criteria for Social Standing: Caste or Charisma. When dealing with a race that has a different concept of Social Standing, all DMs from Social Standing or its alien equivalent – whether positive or negative – are halved. The Universal Persona Profile (UPP) The Cepheus Engine utilizes a concise format to encapsulate data on an individual character’s characteristic scores in a manner that, with a little practice, can be quickly and easily read. The specifics of th e Universal Persona Profile can be found below: 123456, or 123456 -7 for psionic characters

Cepheus Engine SRD 26 Samardan Pre ss Table: Homeworld Skills by Planetary Description Descriptor Skill No Law Gun Combat -0 Low Law Gun Combat -0 Medium Law Gun Combat -0 High Law Melee Combat -0 Table: Homeworld Skills by Trade Code Trade Code Skill Agricultural Animals -0 Asteroid Zero -G-0 Desert Survival -0 Fluid Oceans Watercraft -0 Garden Animals -0 High Technology Computer -0 High Population Streetwise -0 Ice-Capped Zero -G-0 Industrial Broker -0 Low Technology Survival -0 Poor Animals -0 Rich Carou sing-0 Water World Watercraft -0 Vacuum Zero -G-0 Primary Education Skills A formal education gives you a basic level of competence in various sciences and academic disciplines. Any character may choose from the following list: Admin -0, Advocate -0, Animals -0, Carousing -0, Comms -0, Computer -0, Electronics -0, Engineer ing-0, Life Sciences -0, Linguistics -0, Mechanics -0, Medic ine-0, Physical Science s-0, Social Science s-0, Space Science s-0. Careers Characters in the Cepheus Engine do not start at the age of majority and jump immediately into play with only their background skills. Instead, characters gain experience by pursuing one of twenty -four different career s. The random nature of career paths (also known as prior history or prior careers) leads to characters of all levels of experience, and from all walks of life. A character gains more skills the longer they stay in character creation, but not without risk of aging. Player choices will have great impact on the final disposition of a character. At ma ny points during a career, a character will have to make a throw of some sort. Most of these throws are characteristic throws – roll 2 D6, add the DM from the listed characteristic, and try to get a total higher than the listed value. A throw of Int 8+ mean s ‘roll 2 D6, add your Intelligence DM, and you succeed if you roll an 8 or more’. A few throws are skill checks, where you add any levels in that skill and the DM from an appropriate characteristic, if specified. For example, a throw of Gambling 8+ would m ean ‘roll 2 D6, add your Gambling skill and the DM from an appropriate characteristic such as Dexterity, if specified, and get over 8’.

Cepheus Engine SRD 29 Samardan Pre ss Training Tables for this career. A character may attempt a Commission roll once per term, and trying for commission is optional. A draftee may not attempt a Commission check in the first term of service. Each career that has a commission check also has an Advancement roll, representing your character’s ability t o advance with the ranks of your chosen career’s hierarchy. If you are Rank 1 or higher, you may attempt an Advancement roll each term. If you are successful, then you move to the next rank and gain an extra roll on any of the Skills and Training Tables fo r this career. You also get any benefits listed for your new rank. You may only attempt to advance once per term, and you may attempt to advance in the same term in which you are commissioned. Commissions and advancement are not available in the Athlete, B arbarian, Belter, Drifter, Entertainer, Hunter and Scout careers. Skills and Training Each career has skill tables associated with it – Personal Development, Service Skills, Specialist Skills and Advanced Education. In each term you spend in a career, pic k one of these tables and roll 1 D6 to see which skill you increase. You may only roll on the Advanced Education table if your character has Education 8+. Because the Athlete, Barbarian, Belter, Drifter, Entertainer, Hunter and Scout careers do not have com mission or advancement checks, characters get to make two rolls for skills instead of one every term. Cascade Skills Some skills are "cascade skills" meaning that they have specializations – specialized forms of that skill. When a cascade skill is selecte d, the character must immediately decide on a specialization. Each cascade skill will list one or more specializations that may be chosen from. Upon taking a level in a cascade skill specialization, all other specializations of that skill without skill lev els are treated as Zero -level skills. A character may have multiple specializations in a skill, such as Natural Weapons -2 and Slashing Weapons -1, under Melee Combat. Injuries Characters that are wounded in combat or accidents during character creation mus t roll on the Injury table. Table: Injury Table 1D6 Injury 1 Nearly killed. Reduce one physical characteristic by 1 D6, reduce both other physical characteristics by 2 (or one of them by 4). 2 Severely injured. Reduce one physical characteristic by 1 D6. 3 Missing eye or limb. Reduce Strength or Dexterity by 2. 4 Scarred. You are scarred and injured. Reduce any one physical characteristic by 2. 5 Injured. Reduce any physical characteristic by 1. 6 Lightly injured. No permanent effect. Injury Crisis If any characteristic is reduced to 0, then the character suffers an injury crisis. The character dies unless he can pay 1 D6x10,000 C redits for medical care, which will bring any characteristics back up to 1. The character automatically fails any Qualifica tion checks from now on – he must either continue in the career he is in or become a Drifter if he wishes to take any more terms. Medical Care If your character has been injured, then medical care may be able to undo the effects of damage. The restoration of a lost characteristic costs Cr5,000 per point.

Cepheus Engine SRD 30 Samardan Pre ss If your character was injured in the service of a patron or organization, then a portion of his medical care may be paid for by that patron. Roll 2 D6 on the table below, adding your Rank as a DM. The resul t is how much of his medical care is paid for by his employer. Table: Medical Bills Career Roll of 4+ Roll of 8+ Roll of 12+ Aerospace System Defense, Marine, Maritime System Defense, Navy, Scout, Surface System Defense 75% 100% 100% Agent, Athlete, Bu reaucrat, Diplomat, Entertainer, Hunter, Mercenary, Merchant, Noble, Physician, Pirate, Scientist, Technician 50% 75% 100% Barbarian, Belter, Colonist, Drifter, Rogue 0% 50% 75% Medical Debt During finishing touches, you must pay any outstanding costs f rom medical care or anagathic drugs out of your Benefits before anything else. Aging The effects of aging begin when a character reaches 34 years of age. At the end of the fourth term, and at the end of every term thereafter, the character must roll 2 D6 on the Aging Table. Apply the character’s total number of terms as a negative Dice Modifier on this table. Table: Aging Table 2D6 Effects of Aging –6 Reduce three physical characteristics by 2, reduce one mental characteristic by 1 –5 Reduce three physi cal characteristics by 2. –4 Reduce two physical characteristics by 2, reduce one physical characteristic by 1 –3 Reduce one physical characteristic by 2, reduce two physical characteristic by 1 –2 Reduce three physical characteristics by 1 –1 Reduce t wo physical characteristics by 1 0 Reduce one physical characteristic by 1 1+ No effect Aging Crisis If any characteristic is reduced to 0 by aging, then the character suffers an aging crisis. The character dies unless he can pay 1 D6x10,000 Credits fo r medical care, which will bring any characteristics back up to 1. The character automatically fails any Qualification checks from now on – he must either continue in the career he is in or become a Drifter if he wishes to take any more terms. Anagathics While using anagathic drugs, the character effectively does not age – add the number of terms since the character started taking anagathics as a positive Dice Modifier to rolls on the aging table. If a character stops taking anagathics, then he must roll i mmediately on the aging table to simulate the shock that comes from his system beginning to age again. The risk of trying to obtain a reliable supply and the disruption to the character’s biochemistry means the character must make a second Survival check i f he passes his first Survival check in a term. If either check is failed, the character suffers a mishap and is ejected from the career.

Cepheus Engine SRD 31 Samardan Pre ss The drugs cost 1 D6x2,500 Credits for each term that the character uses the drugs. These costs are paid out of the char acter’s eventual mustering -out cash benefits. If the character cannot pay these bills, he goes into debt. Reenlistment and Retirement At the end of each term, the character must decide that they wish to continue on their career path or if they wish to mus ter out. If continuation is desired, the character must make a successful Reenlistment check as listed for their current profession or service. If the character rolls a natural 12, they cannot leave their current career and must continue for another term. If the check is not successful, then they cannot reenlist and the character must leave their current career. A character that has served 7 or more terms in character creation must retire and cannot undertake any more prior experience, unless they roll a n atural 12 during Reenlistment and must serve another term of service. Optional Rule: The Referee may want to change the maximum number of terms spent in character creation from 7 to something else. For example, the Referee may feel that characters built up to a maximum of 3 or even 4 terms are in the prime of their life, but not so experienced that they won’t take up adventuring opportunities as they are presented. Optional Rule: In some universes, the Referee may elect to totally remove the maximum number of terms spent in character creation. A character who has served 5 or more terms in a single service receives a yearly retirement pension, even if he or she later becomes an adventurer. Table: Retirement Pay by Terms Served Terms Annual Retirement Pay 5 Cr10,000 6 Cr12,000 7 Cr14,000 8 Cr16,000 9+ +Cr2,000 per term beyond 8 Mustering Out Benefits Characters who end their careers receive one benefit per term served in which they did not lose benefits. An additional benefit is gained if the character held rank O4, and two for rank O5. A character with rank O6 gains three extra benefits. Cash Benefits Up to 3 benefit rolls can be taken on the Cash table. All others must be taken in material benefits. Characters with Gambling skill or who have retired g ain +1 on Cash Benefit rolls. Material Benefits Material benefits may be characteristics alterations, passages or ship shares. Membership in the Explorers' Society is possible, and subsequent receipts of weapon benefits may be taken as skill levels instea d. Note that characters of rank O5 or O6 gain +1 on Material Benefit rolls.  Courier Vessel: The character considered to be on detached duty with the scout exploration service, and has been granted the use of a surplus 100 -ton TL9 Courier starship on a rese rve basis. The scout exploration service also provides free maintenance and fuel at any scout base. All other ship expenses are the responsibility of the character. While the character is at liberty to use the vessel as they see fit, the vessel still belon gs to the scout exploration service, and thus cannot be abandoned or sold without consequences.

Cepheus Engine SRD 32 Samardan Pre ss In exchange for the use of the ship, the character and the ship are both considered to be available to return to active duty at a moment's notice, should the sc out exploration service have need.  Explorers' Society: The character is a member of the prestigious Explorers' Society. The Explorers' Society will provide members with a free high passage ticket every two months, plus access to the Society's information n etwork and Society -run resorts. This benefit can only be received once; any further receipt of this has no additional benefit. After character creation, characters may purchase membership into the Explorers’ Society. A successful application for lifetime m embership requires a Routine ( -2) Admin check modified by the character’s Social Standing, and if accepted, a payment of Cr1,000,000. Failure on the application process indicates the character has been black listed. If a character has been black listed, th e Explorers’ Society will no longer accept membership applications from them. Membership is non -refundable and non -transferrable.  Passage: The character has a single ticket of the type named (low, mid, high) for travel on a starship. It is good for one Jum p to any destination.  Research Vessel: A scientific foundation, an interstellar corporation or some other equally affluent patron has granted the character the use of a 200 -ton TL9 Research Vessel. All ship expenses, other than annual maintenance, are the responsibility of the character. This ship still belongs to the patron, and therefore cannot be sold or abandoned without consequences.  Ship Shares: Ship shares may be received as benefits. Each ship share is worth approximately Cr2,000,000 toward the purc hase of a vessel. A starship can be purchased for one -fifth of its base value with a 40 -year loan attached to it. For every one -fifth of its base value that is paid to the bank in either ship shares or cash, the period of the loan is reduced by ten years. Ship shares may not be redeemed for cash.  Weapon: The character leaves the service with an appropriate weapon (gun or blade). Once a weapon is taken as a benefit, additional receipts of the weapon may be taken as skill in that weapon instead. An individual is always free to take additional physical examples of the weapons instead of skill levels, if so desired.

Cepheus Engine SRD 42 Samardan Pre ss Game Mechanics Avians have Weak Strength (1 D6), Notable Dexterity (3 D6) and Weak Endurance (1 D6). Avians also have the Flyer (9m), Low G ravity Adaptation, Natural Pilot, Slow Speed (4.5m) and Small traits. This winged race reaches maturity at 22, starts aging at 46, stands 105+(2 D6x2) centimeters tall, and have a mass of 20+(2 D6x2) kilograms. Espers Espers are humans or near -human humanoi ds that have embraced the commonplace usage of psionics. Espers tend to be tall and slender in build, and their aloof and detached nature makes them inscrutable to other humans not of their culture. As a race, they have a tendency to be more mystical or ph ilosophical than other species. Game Mechanics Espers follow the standard rules for human characters. In addition, Espers possess the Psionic trait. Insectans Descended from Carnivore/Chaser stock, the Insectans are an insectoid race that is hard for mo st other races to understand. Averaging 1.8 meters in height, and massing around 90 kilograms, the poikilothermic Insectans are very community -conscious, putting the needs of the “colony” before the needs of the individual. They have a very limited ability of individual identity, and more often consider themselves as an extension of the “queen.” With improved nutrition impacting intelligence, as well as exposure to other cultures, a growing minority of Insectans have begun to establish a stronger sense of a personal Self, but remain heavily influenced by their communal instincts. Insectans often serve the greater whole of interstellar society in service -oriented roles, depending on their particular gender, those being “worker” (sterile female), “soldier” (st erile female), “drone” (fertile male), or “queen” (fertile female). While there is little in the way of gross anatomical differences between the genders, carapace coloration and bearing help non -Insectans distinguish one from another. Game Mechanics Insec tans have Notable Dexterity (2 D6+2). Insectans also have the Armo red, Bad First Impression, Caste, Cold - blooded, Fast Speed (9m), Great Leaper and Hive Mentality traits. Insectans reach maturity at 18 and start aging at 34 (much like humans), stand 160+(2 D6x5) centimeters tall, and have a mass of 60+(2 D6x5) kilograms. NOTE: Insectans have a different characteristic score called Caste, which replaces Social Standing. Caste is generated in the same manner as Social Standing. All modifications to Social Standi ng referenced in the character creation process impacts Caste equally. Merfolk Genetically manipulated from pure human stock to life on a waterworld, Merfolk bear less and less resemblance with their genetic ancestors with each passing generation. The cha nges in skin coloration toward pale greens and blues, combined with the presence of their gills, webbed appendages and a thin layer of protective blubber give the Merfolk a somewhat amphibian appearance. Game Mechanics Merfolk possess the Amphibious, Aqua tic, Natural Swimmer and Water Dependent alien traits. Reptilians Bearing a strong saurian appearance, the Reptilians descend from homeothermic carnivorous chaser stock. Their scales tend to be brilliantly patterned, particularly among the males of the sp ecies. Standing approximately 1.9 meters tall, with a mass of 85 kilograms, the Reptilians still bear many of the features of their saurian ancestors.

Cepheus Engine SRD 45 Samardan Pre ss  Uplifted: This species was originally non -sentient, but has been raised to a higher intelligence by another species. Uplifted races generally become client species of their patron. Two common uplifted animals are apes and dolphins: o Uplifted apes have Notable Strength and Endurance (+2) but all other characteristics are Weak ( –2). They have the Uplifted trait. o Uplifted dolphins have Notable Strength (+4) and Notable Endurance (+2) but Weak Intelligence, Education and Social Standing ( –2). They have the Uplifted, Aquatic (fully aquatic, air -breathers) and No Fine Manipulators traits.  Water Dependent: Although members of this species are amphibious, they can only survive out of the water for 1 hour per 2 p oints of Endurance (after that, refer to the drowning rules).  Weak (Characteristic): The opposite of Notable (Characteristic), some species are weaker, less resilient or less well educated than others. Characters from such races have a negative Dice Modifi er when rolling for that characteristic ( –2 unless otherwise specified), and their racial maximum for that characteristic is decreased by the same amount.

Cepheus Engine SRD 60 Samardan Pre ss Suspended animation may be stopped at any time previous to its duration expiring, provided external stimulus is given to awaken the sleeper (such as a friend or a mechanical alarm). Psionically Enhanced Strength Psionic Strength points may be converted to normal Strength points on a temporary basis. The character makes the commitment, reduces his Psionic Strength by a specific number of points, and increases his physical Strength characteristic by that number. In no case may the number of Strength points gained exceed the character's current level in Awareness, and Strength may not be increased beyond the character's racial maximum. Psionically enhanced strength reaches its new level immediately, remains at that peak for ten minut es, and then declines at the rate of 1 Strength point per minute until the normal Strength level is reached. This power works as normal on wounded characters but their Strength returns to the wounded level rather than the normal value. It cannot be used as a ‘quick heal'. Psionically Enhanced Endurance Psionically enhanced endurance works in exactly the same way as psionically enhanced strength except the characteristic boosted is Endurance rather than Strength, including its lack of healing ability. Rege neration Wounds and injuries may be healed rapidly. Strength, Dexterity and Endurance lost to injury, disease, poison or other trauma may be healed by the application of this ability, exchanging one Psionic Strength point to regenerate one characteristic p oint. Any amount of Psionic Strength may be expended with a single use of regeneration but it may not be used again until all expended Psionic Strength is recovered. Regeneration may also be applied to the growing of new limbs or organs to replace lost one s or to heal unrecovered old wounds suffered prior to psionic training. Regeneration may not be used to counteract aging. Awareness is not capable of affecting others and may not be used for healing or enhancing other characters. Clairvoyance Clairvoyanc e is the general talent which allows a person to sense events at some location displaced from the viewer. There are several levels of clairvoyant ability. Clairvoyance abilities allow eavesdropping activities as well as spying and detection -free exploratio n of situations. While telepathic life detection will determine the presence of living minds in a closed room, for example, sense will determine if a room is occupied or empty. Clairvoyant activity cannot be sensed by others, including by other psionic ind ividuals. Table: Clairvoyance Ability Difficulty Timing Cost Sense Routine (+2) 1D6 rounds 1+Range Clairvoyance Average (+0) 1D6 rounds 2+Range Clairaudience Average (+0) 1D6 rounds 2+Range Clairsentience Difficult ( -2) 1D6 rounds 3+Range Sense This is th e basic ability to sense things at some point in the distance. A character will become aware of the most rudimentary characteristics of a location when applying this ability. For example, the Referee will give a basic description, without detail: ‘a room containing four dogs' or ‘an open plain with a tree, and no animals or men present'. The clairvoyant character must state the range at which he is applying his talent, and will generally sense the most interesting or important feature at that range. T he Effect of the check determines the level of accuracy and clarity.

Cepheus Engine SRD 61 Samardan Pre ss Clairvoyance This specific ability allows actual remote viewing of a situation at some displaced point. Rather than the ‘snapshot' that sense gives, clairvoyance allows the psion to obse rve as if he was there in person. The clairvoyant character must state the range at which he is applying his talent. The Effect of the check determines the level of detail perceived and the duration in rounds the vision can be maintained for. Clairaudie nce This ability is identical to clairvoyance, with the exception that it allows hearing instead of seeing. Clairsentience This power combines the effects of clairvoyance and clairaudience. The character is capable of both seeing and hearing a specific si tuation. Telekinesis Telekinesis is the talent which allows objects to be manipulated without physically touching them. Any manipulation is treated as if the person was physically handling the item but physical danger, pain, or other stimuli are not pres ent. Telekinesis includes a limited amount of sensory awareness, sufficient to allow actual intelligent manipulation. The Effect of the check determines the duration of the telekinesis in rounds. Items may be thrown using telekinesis. Such items use the Ra nged (thrown) category when attacking, using the higher of the distance between either the psion and the target or the object’s starting location and the target. The amount of damage inflicted by such an object is given in the Telekinesis object; the psion can add the Effect of the attack’s skill check to the damage inflicted. If a creature is the thrown object, both the creature and the target take the same damage on a successful hit. Table: Telekinesis Ability Difficulty Timing Cost Throwing Damage Tele kinetically Lift 10 Grams Easy (+4) 1D6 seconds 2+Range None Telekinetically Lift 100 Grams Routine (+2) 1D6 seconds 3+Range None Telekinetically Lift 1 kg Average (+0) 1D6 seconds 5+Range 1 point Telekinetically Lift 10 kg Difficult ( -2) 1D6 seconds 7+Range 1D6 Telekinetically Lift 100 kg Very Difficult ( -4) 1D6 seconds 9+Range 2D6 Telekinetically Lift 1 000 kg Formidable ( -6) 1D6 seconds 10+Range 8D6 Telepathy Telepathy is the talent of mind -to-mind contact. It is subtle by nature but can also be us ed to bluntly crush the wills of those who oppose the telepath. Table: Telepathy Ability Difficulty Timing Cost Life Detection Easy (+4) 1D6 rounds 1+Range Telempathy Routine (+2) 1D6 rounds 1+Range Read Surface Thoughts Average (+0) 1D6 rounds 2+Range Send Thoughts Difficult ( -2) 1D6 rounds 2+Range Probe Very Difficult ( -4) 1D6 minutes 4+Range Assault Formidable ( -6) 1D6 seconds 8+Range Shield -- -- --

Cepheus Engine SRD 62 Samardan Pre ss Life Detection The most elementary form of telepathy is the ability to detect the presence of o ther minds. Life detection enables a character to sense the presence of other minds, the number of minds present, the general type of minds (animal, human, and so on) and their approximate location. Life detection is reasonably sophisticated, and can disti nguish intelligent beings from bacteria or unimportant animals in the area. It functions best at detecting intelligent minds. Shielded minds are undetectable (whether the shield is natural or artificial in origin). If an individual whom the telepath knows is ‘life detected' he or she will be recognized. Telempathy The communication of emotions and basic feelings is accomplished by telempathy. This ability serves well in the handling of animals and beasts of burden but may also be applied as a psychological weapon against humans. Sending of emotions such as love, hate, fear, and others may influence other beings (although not necessarily in the manner desired). Telempathy also allows the emotions and feelings of others to be read by a character. The Effect o f the check determines the strength of the projected emotion. Telepaths will always recognize when someone is using telempathy to bend their emotions but others will not. The change in mood may be dramatic and inexplicable but most people will simply ascri be it to the mercurial nature of human emotions. Shielded individuals are immune to telempathy as they are all other Telepathy powers. Read Surface Thoughts The most widely known feature of Telepathy is the ability to read the thoughts of other individual s. Only active, current thoughts are read by this ability, with the subject (if himself not a telepath) unaware of the activity. Individuals with telepathic ability cannot be read due to the presence of their natural shields, unless they willingly lower th eir shielding. The Effect of the check determines the clarity of the telepath's perceptions. Send Thoughts Complementary to the ability to read surface thoughts is the ability to send thoughts to others. Such individuals need not themselves be telepathic to receive such thoughts. Telepathic individuals are normally open to such transmissions, but may close their shields against them if they become bothersome or threatening. Probe The application of great psionic strength will enable a telepath to delve deep into the mind of a subject and to then read his innermost thoughts. Questioning can be used in the procedure to force the subject to divulge specific information. The prober can easily determine deliberate untruths told (thought) by the subject. Probe cannot be used against a shielded mind. Again, the Effect of the check determines the clarity of the telepath's perceptions. Assault Violence may be dealt by a telepath. An unshielded mind, when assaulted telepathically, is rendered unconscious immediat ely and the character suffers 2 D6 + Effect damage. Unlike normal damage, assault damage is applied to Psionic Strength (if the victim has it), then Intelligence, then Endurance. Psionic Strength and Endurance return as normal. Intelligence returns at the r ate of one point per day. When a shielded mind is assaulted the two telepaths make opposed Telepathy checks. If the attacker wins, the victim suffers damage as normal.

Cepheus Engine SRD 66 Samardan Pre ss CHAPTER 4: EQUIPMENT The following section lists examples of common equipment that adventurers may want. Aside from armor and weapons, each listing notes the object's name and a basic description. The technological level indicates local technology required to manufacture something with the capabilities listed. Price and weight are for an item manufactured by an interstellar society of tech level 10 -15; item s produced at lower tech levels will probably be bulkier and more expensive. An item with no weight or size given can be carried or worn without difficulty. Additional lines of explanation are given where considered necessary. Technology Level Overview Technology Level, also known as Tech Level or TL, is a measure of the scientific and production capacity of a world and the complexity and effectiveness of a piece of equipment. Table: Technology Level Overview TL Descriptor Notable Characteristics 0 Prim itive No technology. 1 Primitive Roughly on a par with Bronze or Iron age technology. 2 Primitive Renaissance technology. 3 Primitive Mass production allows for product standardization, bringing the germ of industrial revolution and steam power. 4 Industrial Transition to industrial revolution is complete, bringing plastics, radio and other such inventions. 5 Industrial Widespread electrification, tele -communications and internal combustion. 6 Industrial Development of fission power and more adva nced computing. 7 Pre-Stellar Can reach orbit reliably and has telecommunications satellites. 8 Pre-Stellar Possible to reach other worlds in the same system, although terraforming or full colonization is not within the culture’s capacity. 9 Pre-Stellar Development of gravity manipulation, which makes space travel vastly safer and faster; first steps into Jump Drive technology. 10 (A) Early Stellar With the advent of Jump, nearby systems are opened up. 11 (B) Early Stellar The first primitive (non -creative) artificial intelligences become possible in the form of “low autonomous” interfaces, as computers begin to model synaptic networks. 12 (C) Average Stellar Weather control revolutionizes terraforming and agriculture. 13 (D) Average Stellar The battle dress appears on the battlefield in response to the new weapons. “High autonomous” interfaces allow computers to become self -actuating and self - teaching. 14 (E) Average Stellar Fusion weapons become man -portable. 15 (F) High Stellar Black globe generators suggest a new direction for defensive technologies, while the development of synthetic anagathics means that the human lifespan is now vastly increased. Higher Technology Levels exist and may appear in some Cepheus Engine universes. Currency The Credit (Cr ) is the standard unit of currency in Cepheus Engine. Larger denominations include the KiloCredit (KCr; 1,000 Credits) and the MegaCredit (MCr; 1,000,000 Credits).

Cepheus Engine SRD 67 Samardan Pre ss Armor Armor reduces the amount of damage a character takes from a hit, ba sed on the type of armor worn. The armor rating for a set of armor is equal to the amount of damage reduced by the armor when you are hit in combat. A hit with Effect 6+ always inflicts at least one point of damage, regardless of the target’s armor. Unless otherwise noted, only one type of armor can be worn at a time. Resolve damage from the outside in – damage that gets through the outer layer of armor is next applied to the inner layer. TL: The earliest tech level at which this item first becomes availabl e. Armor Rating (AR): The amount of damage reduced by the armor when an attack strikes the character. When two values are listed separated by a slash, the number to the left of the slash represents the armor rating against all attacks except lasers, while the number to the right of the slash represents the armor rating against laser attacks. Cost: The cost of the item in Credits (Cr). Weight: The weight of the item in kilograms. Skill Required: Some armors have a required skill. A character suffers the usua l unskilled penalty when using armor without levels in the required skill. Table: Common Personal Armor Armor TL AR Cost Wgt Skill Required Ablat 9 3/8* Cr75 2kg -- Battle Dress 13 18 Cr200,000 60kg Battle Dress Cloth 6 9 Cr250 2kg -- Combat Armor 11 11 Cr20,000 18kg Zero -G Hostile Env Vacc Suit 12 8 Cr18,000 40kg Zero -G Jack 1 3 Cr50 1kg -- Mesh 7 5 Cr150 2kg -- Reflec 10 0/14 Cr1500 1kg -- Vacc Suit 9 6 Cr9000 8kg Zero -G Armor Descriptions Ablat (TL 9): A cheap alternative to Reflec, ablat arm or is made from a material that ablates (vaporizes) when hit by laser fire. Each laser hit on ablat reduces its armor value (versus lasers) by one, but the armor is cheap and easily replaceable. Battle Dress (TL 13): The ultimate personal armor, battle dre ss is a powered form of combat armor. The servomotors vastly increase the user's speed and strength, boosting his Strength and Dexterity by +4 while wearing the armor. Damage to the wearer's characteristics is calculated as normal, but the values from the armor are used for all other purposes such as hand to hand damage or skill checks. The suit has a built -in Model 2 computer running an Expert Tactics -2 program to give tactical advice and updates and is commonly outfitted with numerous upgrades. The suit i s fully enclosed, with a six -hour air supply and gives full protection against environmental hazards – including NBC shielding – as if it was an HEV suit. Cloth (TL 7): A heavy duty body suit tailored from ballistic cloth. The fabric absorbs impact energy and spreads it over the body, which can result in bruising. However, cloth armor is highly useful and versatile – it can be effectively concealed under normal clothing although observers making an Investigate or Recon check at 8+ will notice something unus ual. Combat Armor (TL 11): This full -body suit is used by the military and not generally available on the open market, although those with military or criminal contacts can obtain it without much difficulty. It is issued to troop units and mercenary batta lions. Combat armor protects from hard vacuum in the same way as a vacc suit and provides life support for six hours.

Cepheus Engine SRD 73 Samardan Pre ss Densitometer: The remote densitometer uses an object’s natural gravity to measure its density, building up a three -dimensional image of the inside and outside of an object. Electromagnetic Probe: This handy device detects the electromagnetic emissions of technological devices, and can be used as a diagnostic tool when examining equipment (+1 DM to work out what’s wrong with it) or when searching for hidden bugs or devices. The Comms skill can be us ed to sweep a room for bugs. Hand Calculator: Allows the user to perform mathematical calculations quickly. Hand Computer: The ‘handcomp' provides services of a small computer, plus serves as a computer terminal when linked (by its integral radio, network interface jack, or by other circuit) to a standard computer. Holographic Projector: A holographic projector is a toaster -sized box that, when activated, creates a three - dimensional image in the space around it or nearby – the range is approximately three m eters in all directions. The image can be given pre -programmed animations within a limited range and the projector includes speakers for making sound. The projected holograms are obviously not real so this device is mostly used for communication. The TL 12 version can produce holograms real enough to fool anyone who fails an Intelligence check (made upon first seeing the hologram), at double the cost, and the TL 13 version can produce holograms that are true -to-life images, at ten times the cost. Inertial L ocator: Indicates direction and distance traveled from the starting location. Magnetic Compass: Indicates direction of magnetic north, if any exists. Metal Detector: Indicates presence of metal within a 3 meter radius (including underground), with the indicating signal growing stronger as it gets closer to the source. Neural Activity Sensor (NAS): This device consists of a backpack and detachable handheld unit, and can detect neural activity up to 500 meters away. The device can also give a rough estimation of the intelligence level of organisms based on brainwave patterns. The data from a neural activity scanner can be interpreted using the Comms, the Life Sciences or the Social Sciences skills. Radiation Counter: Indicates presence and intensity of radioac tivity within a 30 -meter radius. The indicating signal will grow stronger as it gets closer to the source. Wrist Watch: Allows the user to tell time. At teck level 9, can be configured to multiple worlds, as well as standard time, and allows the user to co nfigure alarms based on specific times. Robots and Drones Robots are iconic to science fiction. This section describes the robots and drones commonly available in a Cepheus Engine campaign. A robot has an Intellect program running, allowing it to make dec isions independently, while drones are remote -controlled by a character with the Comms skill. Robots and drones operate in combat like characters but take damage as if they were vehicles. They have Hull and Structure characteristics instead of an Enduranc e characteristic, and an Endurance DM of 0. Any robot running an Intellect program has an Intelligence and Education score. Drones have neither. A robot’s Education characteristic is representative of the information programmed into it and even low -end rob ots can have high Education scores. Most robots have Social Standing characteristics of 0 as they are not social creations but there are some exceptions, usually high -end models running advanced Intellect programs. Drones do not have Social Standing but in cases where they are used to engage in diplomacy or other social intercourse the operator can use his own Social Standing score. Cargo Robot (TL 11): These simple, heavy -duty robots are found in starport docks and on board cargo ships. Cargo drones can b e constructed as low as Technology Level 9 but their utility is extremely limited until the invention of Intellect programs. Strength 30 (+8), Dexterity 9 (+1), Hull 2, Structure 2 Intelligence 3 ( –1), Education 5 ( –1), Social Standing 0 ( –3)

Cepheus Engine SRD 84 Samardan Pre ss Automatic Rifle: A highly refined and tuned version of t he rifle, capable of full automatic fire as well as semi - automatic shots. Normally, the automatic rifle fires bursts of four bullets for each pull of the trigger. It may be switched to semi -automatic fire at the end of a combat round, after all firing, in which case it is treated as a rifle until switched back to burst mode. Ammunition and magazines are identical to those used for the rifle. Auto Pistol: Also referred to as a Semi -Automatic Pistol, Automatic Pistol or just a Pistol, the auto pistol is a basic repeating handgun. One cartridge is fired for each pull of the trigger. Auto pistol ammunition is interchangeable with submachinegun ammunition (although magazines are not). Preloaded magazines may be inserted into an empty pistol, but require a reload action to complete. Body Pistol: A small, non -metallic semiautomatic pistol designed to evade detection by most weapon detectors. One cartridge is fired for each pull of the trigger. Pre -loaded magazines may be inserted into the pistol when it is empty, re quiring a reload action to do so. Body pistol ammunition is not interchangeable with the ammunition for any other types of guns. Bow: A stout but supple piece of wood carved to a specific shape and strung with a piece of cord, string or gut to increase ten sion. The string is pulled back and released to hurl an arrow long distances with surprising force. At higher technology levels, bows are modified with additional strings and pulley systems to add accuracy and power. Carbine: A short type of rifle firing a small caliber round. A magazine containing ten rounds is inserted into the underside of the carbine ahead of the trigger guard or behind the handgrip (this configuration is referred to as “Bullpup”, and in some localities carbines may be referred to as Bu llpups), and one round is fired with each pull of the trigger. Replacement of an empty magazine takes a reload action. Carbine ammunition is not interchangeable with any other type of ammunition. In essence, a carbine is a short rifle, firing a cartridge o f smaller, lighter caliber. A sling usually allows the carbine to be carried on the shoulder, out of the way. Crossbow: A horizontal bow set into a mechanical firing mechanism and stronger -than -normal pull, crossbows are very powerful weapons that are very time consuming to reload. At higher technology levels, crossbows are built with crank and pulley systems that make the weapons easier to reload, even self -loading at TL9. Reloading a TL2 crossbow takes 6 minor actions, at TL4 this is reduced to 3 minor ac tions. Gauss Rifle: The ultimate development of the slug thrower, the gauss rifle generates an electromagnetic field along the length of the barrel which accelerates a bullet to high velocities. The round itself consists of a dense armor piercing core surr ounded by a softer metal covering, ending in a hollow point, giving the round excellent stopping power and good armor penetration. Laser Carbine: A lightweight version of the laser rifle, firing high energy bolts using current from a backpack battery/power pack. The laser carbine fires a 2mm beam of energy, aimed by integrated optic sights. The power pack is capable of producing 50 shots before it requires recharging. Recharging requires at least eight hours connected to a high -energy source. The laser carb ine is connected to the power pack by a heavy -duty cable. Laser Pistol: A pistol equivalent of the laser carbine, though still dependent on an external power pack. Laser Rifle: The standard high energy weapon, firing energy bolts in the same manner as the laser carbine. Heavier, the laser rifle is also capable of longer sustained action, and is somewhat sturdier. The power pack can provide 100 shots before recharging. As in the laser carbine, the laser rifle is connected to the power pack by a heavy -duty ca ble. Power packs are not interchangeable between the two weapons, however. Revolver: An early handgun, the revolver fires 9mm bullets with characteristics similar to those used by the automatic pistol but not interchangeable with them. No magazine is used: six cartridges are inserted into the revolver individually. Reloading takes two combat rounds, or one combat round if the individual foregoes the benefit of evasion. Rifle: The standard military arm, firing a 7mm, 10 gram bullet at a velocity of approxim ately 900 meters per second. Longer and heavier than a carbine, it is also more effective. Standard equipment includes provisions for attaching a bayonet and telescopic sights, and a shoulder sling. A twenty -round magazine is attached to the front of the t rigger guard, and one round is fired with each pull of the trigger. Replacement of the empty

Cepheus Engine SRD 97 Samardan Pre ss Thrown Weapons There are two kinds of thrown weapons: the first kind strike a single target and do damage from the force of their impact, such as thro wing knives or a thrown rock. These use the normal rules for ranged combat. The other kind of thrown weapon is a grenade or other explosive projectile that inflicts no damage from impact but typically delivers a harmful payload. The first kind of thrown we apon adds the Effect of the Athletics check to its damage. The second does not. If the attack fails the projectile scatters in a random direction for (6 + Effect) meters. This is usually only important if the projectile explodes on or after impact. Dama ge Each weapon lists the damage it inflicts as a number of D6. Add the Effect of the attack roll to this damage. The first time a character takes d amage, it is applied to the target's Endurance. If a target is reduced to Endurance 0, then further damage is subtracted from the target's Strength or Dexterity (of the character’s choice). If either Strength or Dexterity is reduced to 0, the character is unconscious and any further damage is subtracted from the remaining physical characteristic. If all three p hysical characteristics are reduced to 0, the character is killed. Once a character has taken damage, any damage from subsequent attacks is allocated to any of the three physical characteristics as the character so chooses. Table: Damage Results Character istic Damage Result At least 1 characteristic is damaged Character is wounded All 3 characteristics are damaged Character is seriously wounded 2 characteristics are at Zero Character is unconscious 3 characteristics are at Zero Character is dead Armo r Armor reduces damage by the value of the armor. A hit with Effect 6+ always inflicts at least one point of damage, regardless of the target's armor. Fatigue A character can become fatigued in numerous ways, such as staying awake too long, over -exertin g themselves or even using certain medications. A fatigued character suffers a –2 DM to all checks until he rests. The amount of rest needed is 3 – the character's Endurance DM hours. If a character suffers fatigue while already fatigued they fall unconsc ious. Unconsciousness An unconscious character may make an Endurance check after every minute of unconsciousness – if successful, he regains consciousness. If he fails he must wait another minute and can then try again with a +1 DM on the check for every check previously failed. Injury and Recovery Injured characters are either wounded or seriously wounded. A character is considered seriously wounded if he has lost at least one point from all three of his physical characteristics. As soon as one of his ph ysical characteristics is restored, no matter how, he is no longer seriously wounded. Seriously wounded characters who have somehow avoided unconsciousness cannot move except to hobble or crawl along at 1.5 meters per combat round. They also lose their min or action in combat.

Cepheus Engine SRD 98 Samardan Pre ss Wounded characters heal naturally and can also benefit from medical care. When characteristic points return from healing, players may choose which characteristic regains the points and may split healing between characteristics if they wish. Natural Healing An injured character regains a number of characteristic points equal to his 1 D6 + Endurance DM per day of full rest. If the character continues an active lifestyle he only heals a number of characteristic points equal to 1 + Enduranc e DM per day. Characters with a low Endurance DM (quite possibly from injury) may degrade (lose more characteristic points) over time if they are unlucky or cannot (or will not) rest. A seriously wounded character only regains characteristic points equal t o his Endurance DM per day of rest, which means that the character may never heal naturally and will even get worse if his Endurance DM is currently negative. Medical Treatment Natural healing is not the only way to recover damage. Characters can also seek out medical treatment. First Aid: Applying first aid restores a number of characteristic points equal to twice the Effect of the Medic check. Points restored by first aid are divided as desired among all damaged physical characteristics. First aid must be applied within five minutes of the injuries being received to be fully effective. A character can still benefit from first aid up to an hour after their injury but they only receive a number of characteristic points equal to the Effect of the Medic c heck. Performing first aid on yourself is a Difficult ( –2) task. Surgery: A character that is seriously wounded (after first aid has been applied) requires surgery. Surgery restores characteristic points just like first aid but if the check is failed the p atient loses characteristic points equal to the Effect. Surgery requires a hospital or sickbay. Once one characteristic is back to its maximum level the patient can benefit from medical care. Surgery does not benefit characters that are not seriously wound ed. Performing surgery on yourself is a Very Difficult ( –4) task. Medical Care: Medical care restores 2 + the character's Endurance DM + the doctor's Medic skill in characteristic points per day, divided evenly among all damaged characteristics. Medical ca re requires a hospital or sickbay and for the patient to undergo full bed rest. Healing and Mental Characteristics Other than Psionic Strength, characters may also suffer damage to their Intelligence or even their Education. Unless otherwise specified, e ach mental characteristic heals at the rate of one point per day. Vehicles in Personal Combat Combat in and on vehicles is much the same as ordinary combat. The differences are as follows: • Unlike people, who are mobile and maneuverable, careful track mus t be kept of which way a vehicle is facing. Vehicle -mounted weapons – and armed passengers, to a lesser extent – are restricted to certain fire arcs. • Vehicles are considered to move on the driver's Initiative. The driver must spend a minor action every ro und to keep control of the vehicle under normal circumstances – a straight road or simple maneuvers – or a significant action to navigate obstacles, conduct evasion or pursuit, or dodge incoming fire. • Attackers gain a +1 DM to hit most vehicles because of their size. Closed and Open Vehicles There are two main types of vehicles: open and closed. Closed Vehicles: Closed vehicles grant cover to the occupants – unless the description mentions otherwise civilian vehicles grant ½ soft cover and military vehi cles full hard cover. Only a few people in a closed vehicle can shoot out, depending on the number of windows or other firing ports and the internal space available. Unless

Cepheus Engine SRD 163 Samardan Pre ss CHAPTER 11: ENVIRONMENT S AND HAZARDS The following are common environmental hazards that are can be encountered in a Cepheus Engine game. Acid Corrosive acids deal 1D6 dama ge per round of exposure, except in the case of total immersion (such as into a vat of acid), which deals 10 D6 damage per round. An attack with acid, such as from a hurled vial or an animal's acidic spittle, counts as a round of exposure. The fumes from m ost acids are poisonous. Those who come close enough to a large body of acid to dunk a creature in it must make an Average (+0) Endurance check or take 1 D6 point of damage. All such characters must make a second Average (+0) Endurance check one minute late r or take another 1 D6 point of damage. Creatures that are immune to acid's caustic properties might still drown in it if they are totally immersed and need to breathe. For more details, see Suffocation. Carrying Capacity Strength determines how much weigh t characters can lift and how much any additional encumbrance slows them down. Characters carrying more than their Light Load suffer penalties. Light Load: As a light load, a character can life and carry up to twice their Strength characteristic score in kilograms without any penalties or difficulties. For example, an average character with a Strength score of 7 can carry up to 14 kilograms as a light load. Medium Load: A medium load is considered to be twice a character's light load, or four times their St rength characteristic score in kilograms. Characters carrying a medium load suffer a DM -1 to all physically based checks, including skill checks. In addition, they move at 75% of their base speed. For example, an average character with a Strength score of 7 can carry up to 28 kilograms as a medium load. Such a character would suffer a DM -1 on all physical checks, and move at 4.5 meters, or 3 squares, per round. Heavy Load: A heavy load is three times the character's light load, or six times their Strength c haracteristic score in kilograms. Characters can lift up to a heavy load overhead. Characters carrying a heavy load suffer a DM -2 to all physically based checks, including skill checks. In addition, they move at 75% of their base speed. For example, an ave rage character with a Strength score of 7 can lift up to 42 kilograms as a heavy load. Such a character would suffer a DM -2 on all physical checks, and move at 4.5 meters, or 3 squares, per round. Maximum Load: A character's maximum load is six times that of their light load, or twelve times their Strength score in kilograms. Characters can lift up to the maximum load off the ground, but can only stagger around with it. While overloaded in this way, characters cannot undertake any other actions, and can on ly move 1.5 meters, or 1 square, per round. For example, an average character with a Strength score of 7 can barely lift up to 94 kilograms as a maximum load. Such a character could perform no other actions while struggling with the load, except to move 1. 5 meters per round. Push/Drag: Characters can push or drag up to five times their heavy load weight, moving at half their normal speed. Favorable conditions (smooth ground, dragging a slick object) double these numbers, and bad circumstances (broken groun d, pushing an object that snags) can reduce them to one -half or less. Gravity and Carrying Capacity The above assumes the character is operating at a standard 1.0 gravity. When operating under a different gravitational pull (or within an artificial gravit y set to a non -standard value), simply divide a character's load weight by the gravitational pull to determine the new load weight value under those conditions. Diseases Diseases reduce a character’s Characteristics, usually Endurance. The character must make an Endurance check with the listed DM to resist the effects of the disease. If the character fails the Endurance check then he takes

Cepheus Engine SRD 164 Samardan Pre ss the listed damage and must make another Endurance check a few hours or days later, depending on the interval of the di sease. Once an Endurance check has been passed, the character has fought off the disease. Table: Sample Diseases Disease DM Damage Interval Pneumonia +0 1D6+4 1D6 weeks Anthrax –3 1D6+2 1D6 days Regina Flu +1 1D6–2 1D6 days Biological Weapon –6 1D6+8 1D6 hours Extremes of Temperature Unusually hot or cold worlds can cause damage unless the characters are suitably protected. Temperatures are in Celsius. Table: Extreme Temperatures Temperature Damage Example Below -200˚ 3D6/round Absolute Zero, Pl uto -200˚ 2D6/round Liquid nitrogen, Neptune -100˚ 1D6/round Ceres -50˚ 2D6/hour Mars -25˚ 1D6/hour Arctic 0˚ None Water melting point 50˚ 1D6/hour Very hot desert 100˚ 2D6/hour Water boiling point 200˚ 1D6/round Mercury 500˚ 2D6/round Venus Abov e 500˚ 3D6/round Surface of the sun Catching on Fire Characters touching a fire source might find their clothes, hair, or equipment on fire. Those at risk of catching fire are allowed a Difficult ( -2) Dexterity check to avoid this fate. If a character's clothes or hair catch fire, he takes 2 D6 damage immediately. In each subsequent round, the burning character must make another Difficult ( - 2) Dexterity check. Failure means he takes another 2 D6 damage that round. Success means the fire has gone out. A cha racter on fire may automatically extinguish the flames by jumping into enough water to douse himself, spraying himself down with a fire extinguisher, vent all atmosphere or otherwise smother the flames. If the character has no such means, rolling on the gr ound or smothering the fire with cloaks or the like permits the character a DM+2 on his next Dexterity check. Falling and Gravity A character who falls on a 1 -gravity world suffers 1 D6 damage per two meters fallen. High - or low -gravity worlds will increas e or decrease the damage. Look up the size code for the world and the gravity level associated with it and multiply the falling damage by the gravity number. Poisons Poisons operate in the same way as diseases, but generally work much faster and often hav e a wider range of effects. Most poisons do not have an interval but apply their damage immediately.

Cepheus Engine SRD 165 Samardan Pre ss Table: Sample Poisons Poison DM Damage Arsenic –2 2D6 Tranq Gas –1D6 Unconsciousness if Endurance check is failed Neurotoxin –4 1D6 Intelligence Radi ation Exposure Radiation exposure is measured in rads. Once a character has absorbed a certain number of rads, he will suffer certain effects. One problem with radiation exposure is that while physical symptoms can be treated and may heal, the radiation ne ver goes away. The character’s rads must be tracked. Further exposure adds to what the character is already carrying around until a deadly level is reached. Accumulated rads can be removed using anti-radiation drugs. Characters exposed to a radiation weapo n will receive a one -time dose of radiation. Entering a radioactive area or being exposed to a leak or solar flare will cause exposure each round or hour. Every time a character experiences exposure to radiation, they must check to see if they’ve come down with radiation sickness, as outlined on the Radiation Effects table. The character must make an Endurance check at the listed DM, and if he fails, he takes the damage listed and must make another Endurance check after the listed interval has passed. This cycle continues until the character succeeds at an Endurance check. At any Radiation Level below Mild, the character is treated as having a lower Endurance characteristic score. If a character should accumulate enough rads to move to a higher Radiation Lev el, the new Endurance characteristic score immediately goes into effect. On the other hand, if a character moves to a lower Radiation Level, such as through anti -radiation drugs, the character heals the difference between the former level and the current l evel over time, as if it were physical damage. If a character’s Effective endurance falls below zero, the character goes unconscious and cannot recover until their Radiation Level drops enough to allow healing to take place. Table: Common Radiation Exposu re Sources Situation Instant (rads) Extended (rads) Irradiated area, low level -- 1D6/hour Irradiated area, moderate level -- 2D6/hour Irradiated area, high level -- 6D6/hour Irradiated area, severe level -- 12D6/hour Active exposure, low level 3D6 3D6x10/hour Active exposure, moderate level 1D6x10 1D6x100/hour Active exposure, high level 2D6x10 2D6x100/hour Active exposure, severe level 4D6x10 3D6x100/hour Table: Radiation Effects Radiation Level Rads Effective Endurance DM Damage Interval Mild <100 -- None None None Low 100-199 Endurance -1 +1 1D6 1D6 weeks Moderate 200-599 Endurance -3 +0 1D6+2 2D6 days High 600-999 Endurance -6 -1 1D6+4 1D6 days Severe 1000+ Endurance -10 -2 1D6+6 1D6 hours

Cepheus Engine SRD 167 Samardan Pre ss CHAPTER 12: WORLDS The basic planetary characteristics are Size, Atmosphere, Hydrology, Population, Government, Law Level, Technology Level, Starport and Bases, and are generated using two -dice throws, with DM s applied based on other characteristics. These characteristics establish the basic identity of a world, and are referred to as the Universal World Profile (UWP). Additional information can be generated, and should be, to more fully describe a world. The Universal World Profile (UWP) The Cepheus Engine utilizes a concise one -line coding to encapsulate data on an individual world in a manner that, with a little practice, can be quickly and easily read. The specifics of the Universal World Profile can be found below: WorldName 0000 A123456 -7x Ni R 123 Na The Explanation “WorldName ” indicates the common name for the world that is being profiled. “0000 ” provides the location of the world’s hex (column, then row) on the sector or subsector map. “A123456 -7” is the classic world profile. Each number or letter is a pseudo -hexadecimal code representing a specific value on the corresponding world data charts. In order, the profile defines the following elements: Starport, World Size, Atmosphere, Hyd rographics, Population, Government, Law Level, followed by a hyphen and finally Technology Level. “X” indicates where information about a world’s bases are noted. A space here indicates that the world has no bases worthy of note on an interstellar level. “Ni” is used here to indicate where special remarks and trade codes are displayed as part of the world data profile. “R” provides information about the world’s Travel Zone classification. A space indicates a world that is generally safe to visit. An “A” rep resents an Amber Zone, indicating a world that adventurers should approach with more caution than normal. An “R” indicates a Red Zone, a world where travel is prohibited for any of a number of reasons, from physical dangers to political secrecy. “123” repr esents a brief synopsis of three pieces of data: a Population Multiplier for the main world, the number of Planetoid Belts in the system, and the number of Gas Giants in the system. “Na” indicates the system’s interstellar allegiance. “Na” is used for non -aligned worlds. Star Mapping For Cepheus Engine universes, the presence of star systems is marked on hex maps, each hex representing one parsec. For each system, generate a Universal World Profile for the primary world of the system. The smallest astrogat ion map size, the subsector, measures 8 hexes wide by 10 hexes high. An intermediate map size, the quadrant, measures two subsectors by two subsectors, while the largest map size, the sector, measures two quadrants by two quadrants. There is a basic one -half chance normally that a world (and its attendant stellar system) will be in a hex. Systematically check each hex on the subsector map, throwing one die and marking the hex with a circle if the result is a 4, 5, or 6. This indicates that a world is presen t; otherwise, leave the hex blank. The Referee may elect to alter the normal chances of worlds, making them more frequent or less frequent to correspond to specific regions of the galaxy. A 50% density (no DM) is appropriate for the spiral arms of the gala xy. Apply a –2 DM for ‘rift sectors’, a –1 DM for sparse sectors and a +1 DM for densely populated sectors.

Cepheus Engine SRD 177 Samardan Pre ss CHA PTER 13: PLANETARY WILDERNESS ENCOUNTERS Characters in the uncivilized areas on the planet’s surface quickly find out that they are not alone. So long as a world can support life, animal encounters and other natural events are common, regardless of the cur rent terrain. This chapter discusses various encounters that can occur in the wilderness on a planet’s surface. Animal Encounters Animals in any ecological system interact with each other, forming food chains, obeying instincts, defending territory, and g enerally living out their lives. When people enter such an ecological system, they will encounter the animals of the system, prompting natural reactions, such as attack or flight. Although the precise nature of animals may change, and they may prove quite alien to ordinary experience, most will conform to the broad classifications given below. A Referee may choose to establish his own ecological system on a specific world, ignoring the encounter system outlined here. This system, however, is intended to allow broad latitude in both animal types and attack/defense mechanisms, while remaining essentially logical and reasonable. Animal Types: Nearly all animals may be classified into four basic categories: herbivore, omnivore, carnivore, and scavenger. Specific definitions for these terms are provided in a later section of these rules, and differ from the precise scientific definitions in current use. Within each category, a variety of animal types exist, based on specific feeding/hunting habits; examples of thi s concept are grazers, chasers, and pouncers. Animals which are encountered may be further classified into various categories and types, and specific attack and defense mechanisms determined. The resulting description indicates the actions an animal will t ake without resorting to such confining labels as bear or tiger. While a Referee may well elect to use such names, this system also allows the players freedom to encounter truly alien beasts as well. Animals and Characteristics Animals have a similar rang e of characteristics to humans, but there are several differences: Instinct: Instinct is the animal equivalent of Education. Animals apply their Instinct DM to tasks such as sensing prey or solving problems. Pack: Pack is the animal equivalent of Social Standing. The higher a creature’s Pack score, the larger the group that it is associated with, and the more standing the creat ure has in that group. Planetary Themes A world's ecology can be extremely diverse. However, the Referee may elect to implement s pecific themes on a planetary basis, to create consistency and flavor in presentation. Distinctive features help make each world stand out to the players as unique experiences. These could range from basic symmetry to reproductive methods (and the associat ed genders), from the number of limb pairs to the common sensory organs. The implementation of a planetary theme lies at the discretion of the Referee. Step One: Choose a Terrain Terrain has an impact on the type of animals one might encounter. Giant aqua tic creatures are not found in forests, after all, nor are feathered flying creatures found flying at the bottom of the ocean. The first step in the rules for creating animals in the Cepheus Engine is to choose the creature’s terrain, as terrain can have a significant impact on an animal’s statistics. The Terrain DM Chart details modifiers for animal subtypes and sizes, In addition, the result of 1 D6 determines the basic movement for a given creature (A for Amphibious, F for Flight, S for Swimming, and W fo r Walking). Some movement codes have a number after them; these are an additional Size DM for the animal.

Cepheus Engine SRD 179 Samardan Pre ss Carrion -Eater (vulture): Scavengers which wait for all other threats to disperse before beginning. Carrion -eaters have Recon. Instinct +2. Chaser (wolf): Animals which kill their prey by attacking and exhausting i t after a chase. Chasers have Athletics. Dexterity +4, Instinct +2, Pack +2. Eater (army ant): Eaters will eat anything they encounter, including characters. Endurance +4. Pack +2. Filter (earthworm): Herbivores which pass their environment through their b odies are termed filters. Unlike grazers, which move to food, filters move a flow of matter through themselves and filter out the food. Endurance +4. Gatherer (raccoon, chimpanzee): Gatherers are herbivores that collect and store food. Gatherers have Recon. Pack +2. Grazer (antelope): Grazers move from food source to food source, often in large packs. Their primary form of defense tends to be fleeing danger. Instinct +2, Pack +4. Hijacker (lion): Scavengers which steal the kills of others through brute forc e or w eight of numbers are hijackers. Strength +2, Pack +2. Hunter (baboon): Opportunistic predators that stalk easy prey. Hunters have Survival. Instinct +2. Intermittent (elephant): Herbivores that do not devote their entire time to searching for food. Intermittents have Pack +4. Intimidator (coyote): Scavengers which establish their claim to food by frightening or intimidating other creatures. Killer (shark): Carnivores that possess a raw killing instinct, attacking in a frenzied manner. Killers have Natural Weapons and either Strength or Dexterity +4, Instinct +4, Pack –2. Pouncer (cat): Pouncers kill by stalking and ambushing their prey. Pouncers have Recon and Athletics. Dexterity +4, Instinct +4. Reducer (vermin): Reducers are scavengers that act constantly on all available food, devouring even the remains left by other scavengers. Pack +4 Siren (venus fly -trap): Sirens create a lure to attract prey. Usually, this lure will be specific to the species the siren preys on, but some rare lures are univ ersal. Pack –4. Trapper (spider): An animal which allows its prey to enter a trap. Generally, any creature surprised by a trapper is caught in its trap. Pack –2. Step Four: Determine Animal Size and Characteristics For each creature, roll 2 D6 for its Size and apply any Size DMs based on terrain and movement. The creature’s Size determines its Weight, Strength, Dexterity and Endurance – for example, a roll of 7 means that the creature has a mass of 100kg, a Strength score of 3D6, a Dexterity score of 3D6 and an Endurance of 3 D6. Intelligence for most animals is 0 or 1. Roll 2 D6+DMs for the animal’s Instinct and Pack. To determine the number appearing value, consult the Number Appearing by Pack Characteristic Score table. All animals have at least Athletics 0, Recon 0, and Survival 0, and most will have 1 D6 ranks split among these skills, Natural Weapons, and any skills listed in their behavior.

Cepheus Engine SRD 196 Samardan Pre ss CHAPTER 16: REFEREEING THE GAME The Referee is the person who takes responsibility for running a Cepheus Engine game. The Referee creates the adventure, runs the players through it, takes on the roles of the various characters the characters meet, and handles any questions about the rules. While running the game is a big responsibility, it's not as hard as it might seem, and providing a fun and entertaining game for your friends can be quite rewarding. The rules of Cepheus Engine pr ovide a comprehensive outline for the basic activities confronting any character in the universe you are creating. These rules are necessarily brief and admittedly omit many possible activities. After all, a roleplaying game cannot ever attempt to provide adequate rules that govern the entire universe. In the hands of players and a Referee, however, the Cepheus Engine rules are the start of dynamic adventures that can range across the universe. This chapter is about helping you as the Referee run your games. The advice found within this chapter is completely optional; feel free to use it or ignore it as you like. Rule Zero Remember that it is just a game. The most important thing in it is to have fun, both for you and your players, and everything else is se condary to that. So if a rule, a plot, or even realism and consistency get in the way of your fun or that of your players, it is your right and duty as the Referee to change it. As a Referee, you, not the rulebooks, are the final arbiter in your game. This is a serious responsibility, but also a great freedom: the freedom to create and run an entertaining game that suits your needs and the needs of your group. If you and your players are enjoying yourself, you are doing things right, even if you are ignorin g or modifying the rules and even if your game is not necessarily realistic or even self -consistent. With that in mind, the most important rule of the game, dubbed Rule Zero in the Cepheus Engine rules, is that the Referee always has the right to modify th e rules. As a Referee, your rules modifications can be as simple and improvised as “um, grab some dice, roll them, and tell me the number” or involve extremely complex home - brew charts that dictate the smallest of details. This is your game, after all. Gaming Style Every gamer tends to enjoy a specific gaming style. Some people are consummate “Role -Players”, gaining a lot of pleasure from character development and interaction. Others are intense “Combat Monkeys”, finding that an action -packed cinematic fre nzy of laser bolts and hand grenades meets their gaming needs. Some players are “Puzzle Solvers”, finding the mental challenges of riddles, logic problems, puzzles and mystery adventures to be the perfect balm. Most of us are a mix of all of the above, in differing proportions and varying levels of interest and intensity. As a Referee, it is recommended that you bear in mind that all styles of play are valid. If everyone is an action fan, combat -heavy games work well. Roleplaying the group’s interactions wi th shopkeepers can be entertaining, as well. For some, delivering long angst -ridden poetry in -game can be fulfilling. Intraparty conflict might be a good thing, with the right group of gamers. Even violating the advice found in these rules is perfectly oka y, so long as the entire gaming group is having fun. Remember Rule Zero! Be aware of what you and your players want. If you want something different from your players, something is going to have to change. Logically, it should be the group in the minority, which in this case would be you as the Referee. Similarly, if a single player wants a different style of play, if it can't be easily integrated, don't force the issue. Sometimes players or Referees don't fit a particular gaming group’s style. It does not make anyone wrong; things just did not work out or come together for that particular game.

Cepheus Engine SRD 200 Samardan Pre ss Character Creation A Referee always needs non -player characters. Use the information in Chapter 1: Character Creation to generate new characters. These characters can easily become future patrons, random encounters, enemies, allies or simply background characters for a Cephe us Engine universe. Personal Combat Take some characters and use the rules from Chapter 5: Personal Combat to practice the combat system. Recreate scenes from science fiction or action movies using the characters, to get a feel for how the rules of combat work in various scenarios. Starship Construction Construct some starships and other vessels using the rules in Chapter 8: Ship Design and Construction. Build on various scales, to get an idea of how the different elements of starship construction work to gether. You can even use the information under Starship Revenues in Chapter 6: Off -World Travel to determine if your ships would be economically viable without outside assistance. Space Combat Take some vessels and pit them against one another using the space combat rules found in Chapter 10: Space Combat. Once again, feel free to recreate scenes from science fiction movies using the vessels, to get a feel for how the rules of space combat work in various scenarios. Subsector Creation Using the rules fou nd in Chapter 12: Worlds, create a subsector and identify the systems within it. Generate and record the UWPs for every system. After the worlds have been created, look over the subsector for possible communication and trade routes. If you are inspired, cr eate some background information on the most interesting worlds. Animal Encounter Creation Choose a world from a list of UWPs, and expand on it. Create some maps of the planet's surface, and the build encounter tables for each terrain type on the map, usi ng the rules found in Chapter 13: Planetary Wilderness Encounters. If you are so inclined, you can then pit some characters against the different animals you've created using the personal combat, so see how they might fare against player characters in the future. Practice Trade and Commerce Grab a 200-ton TL9 Merchant Trader and use the Chapter 7: Trade and Commerce rules to explore the economic environment of a generated subsector. Use the rules for passengers, freight and even speculative trading to get a feel for them. By tracking the revenue and expenses for the ship, it could give you an idea of where traders will focus their attentions within the subsector. If this is being played as a solo game, keep going until either the ship is paid for or the shi p goes bankrupt. This is a good way to validate trade routes, and identify "stepping stone" worlds between strong markets in a subsector. Patron Encounter Creation The seed of most adventures within a Cepheus Engine universe are captured in patron encount ers. Using the details of a subsector's list of UWPs, create and record some patron encounters using the format found under Patron Encounters in Chapter 14: Social Encounters. Think about science fiction and action -based movies, television shows and litera ture, and use those to inspire some of the patron encounters you create.