# Core Rules

Cepheus Engine System Reference Document A Classic Era Science Fiction 2D6 -Based Open Gaming System From Samardan Press Publications

Cepheus Engine SRD 2 Samardan Pre ss Table of Contents INTRODUCTION...................................................... 11 What Is Roleplaying?.......................................... 11 What Is The Cepheus Engine?............................ 11 The Core Task Resolution System...................... 11 The Referee........................................................ 11 The Characters................................................... 12 Characteristics.................................................... 12 Careers............................................................... 12 Skills.................................................................... 12 Game Play.......................................................... 12 Common Cepheus Engine Themes..................... 13 Die Rolls.............................................................. 13 Difficulty and Effect....................................... 14 Opposed Checks............................................. 14 Trying Again................................................... 14 Circumstance Modifiers................................. 14 Time and Checks............................................ 15 Aiding Another............................................... 15 Types of Checks.................................................. 15 Skill Checks..................................................... 15 Attack Rolls.................................................... 15 Characteristic Checks..................................... 15 The Combat Round............................................ 16 Pseudo -Hexadecimal Notation.......................... 16 Important Terms................................................ 16 BOOK ONE: CHARACTERS....................................... 20 CHAPTER 1: CHARACTER CREATION....................... 21 Character Creation Checklist.............................. 21 Characteristics.................................................... 22 Social Standing and Noble Titles.................... 22 Psionic Strength, the Seventh Characteristic. 23 Generating Characteristic Scores................... 23 Characteristic Modifiers................................. 23 Altering Characteristic Scores........................ 24 On Gender and Race..................................... 24 On Alien Species and Social Standing........... 24 The Universal Persona Profile (UPP)................. 24 The Explanation............................................ 25 Universal Character Format.............................. 25 Background Skills............................................... 25 Homeworld Skills.......................................... 25 Primary Education Skills................................ 26 Careers.............................................................. 26 Career Descriptions....................................... 27 Qualifying and the Draft............................... 27 Terms of Service................................................ 28 Basic Training..................................................... 28 Survival.............................................................. 28 Commission and Advancement......................... 28 Skills and Training.............................................. 29 Cascade Skills................................................ 29 Injuries............................................................... 29 Injury Crisis.................................................... 29 Medical Care................................................. 29 Medical Debt................................................. 30 Aging.................................................................. 30 Aging Crisis.................................................... 30 Anagathics..................................................... 30 Reenlistment and Retirement........................... 31 Mustering Out Benefits..................................... 31 Cash Benefits................................................. 31 Material Benefits........................................... 31 Final Details....................................................... 41 Name............................................................. 41 Gender.......................................................... 41 Appearance................................................... 41 Personal Goals............................................... 41 On Alien Species................................................ 41 Avians............................................................ 41

Cepheus Engine SRD 11 Samardan Pre ss INTRODUCTION Welcome to the Cepheus Engine System Reference Document, which outlines the core rule s used by a Classic Era Science Fiction 2 D6-Based Open Gaming System. This Introduction provides you with an overview of what the Cepheus Engine is and how it works, while the later chapters show you how to create characters and embark on your own exciting science fiction adventures. What Is Roleplaying? If you are new to roleplaying, you might be asking yourself, “What is a roleplaying game?” A roleplaying game (sometimes abbreviated as RPG) is a game in which players assume the roles of characters in a fictional setting. Players take responsibility for acting out these roles within a narrative, either through literal acting or through a process of structured decision -making or character development. Actions taken within many games succeed or fail accordin g to a formal system of rules and guidelines, such as the Cepheus Engine rules. A session of Cepheus Engine play is conducted through discussion. One player, the Referee, usually arbitrates any decision based on the rules and presents the setting of the ga me, while each of the other players plays the role of a single character. Together, the Referee and players create a story, much like the way many of us used to create stories playing games of make believe as young children, except with more dice and more structure. What Is The Cepheus Engine? The Cepheus Engine is simply a set of rules for conducting a game based on classic science fiction. Within its pages, you will find rules on creating characters, resolving tasks, fighting other creatures and engaging in huge space battles, building worlds, enjoy the risks of interstellar speculative trading, exploring new worlds, and a host of other diverse activities. Although no rules set can be complete, the Cepheus Engine attempts to provide enough rules to allow you to create almost any science fiction adventure. The Cepheus Engine is inspired by classic science fiction games from the early days of roleplaying, and shares a lot of similarities with these gaming systems. Material from these older rules sets and tho se created under the Cepheus Engine are mutually compatible with only a minimum of adjustments required. To play, you need a copy of the Cepheus Engine rules; several six -sided dice, available at game and hobby stores (you'll need two at a minimum, but mor e is better); and a pencil and some paper. The Core Task Resolution System The Cepheus Engine uses a core task resolution system to resolve actions. Whenever your character attempts any action with a chance of failure, do the following: 1. Roll two six -sided die (abbreviated 2 D6). 2. Add any relevant modifiers (for things like characteristics, skills, difficulty and circumstances). 3. If the result equals or exceeds 8, the action succeeds. If the result is lower than 8, the action fails. This simple system is u sed for nearly everything in the Cepheus Engine, with variations based on the modifiers added to a roll and the effects of success and failure. The Referee Within the Cepheus Engine rules, one of the players is asked to assume the mantle of Referee. The R eferee is the person who will act as an organizer, officiant for questions regarding rules, arbitrator, and moderator for a Cepheus Engine gaming session, or an ongoing Cepheus Engine campaign. The role of the Referee is to weave the other participants' pl ayer -character stories together, control the non -player aspects of the game, create environments in which the players can interact, and solve any player disputes.

Cepheus Engine SRD 41 Samardan Pre ss Final Details It takes more than a set of characteristic scores and skill levels to create a fun character. By adding some final details at the end of character cre ation, you might find the experience of playing the character far more rewarding. Name At the very least, e very character needs a name, preferably one that fits the style of your gaming group and the Referee’s universe. Consider choosing a name based on a ctual “real world” names, on fictional characters or one you’ve simply made up entirely. If you are stuck, try choosing two of your favorite science fiction characters, and taking parts of each of their names to create a unique name for your character. Gender In most games, that means choosing either male or female, but some Referees or universes may offer other options. There’s nothing that says you have to play a character of your own gender. Many consider it a roleplaying challenge to try to portray a different gender in a realistic manner. Appearance Choosing details such as your character’s height, weight, hair color, wardrobe preferences and so forth make it easier to describe your character, which helps everyone visualize your character in their mi nds as they play. Distinctive features often give your character a way of standing out. Personal Goals Time and experience has shown that characters with personal goals are far more rewarding to play in the long run. A personal goal should be something th at takes more than a single adventure to resolve. Good examples might include learning the secrets of ancient civilizations, mastering the psionic arts, or securing political power. Personal goals often provide the Referee with an opportunity to develop st ory arcs based on that character, because the goals inform the Referee about what the character (and presumably the player) is interested in pursuing. It’s okay if the character’s goals change over time. In fact, that’s a great sign of character growth and development. On Alien Species Humans are assumed to be the standard species defined in these rules, and thus have no special abilities or disadvantages to distinguish themselves as a species from the basic rules assumptions for characters. The definition of alien species lies in the realm of the Referee’s powers of creativity, as befits the nature of their campaign and universe. This System Reference Document offers the following examples of alien species in an effort to demonstrate common archetypes foun d in many forms of classic science fiction. Some universes only have humans, while others have hundreds of alien species that characters can encounter. Your Referee is the final arbiter on whether these or any other alien species are present in your campai gn. More specific information on the creation of alien species can be found in Flynn's Guide to Alien Creation, a supplement published by Samardan Press. Avians Descended from Omnivore/Hunter flyers, Avians are a small winged sentient race capable of flig ht on smaller worlds. Avians are a homeothermic, bi -gendered species averaging 1.2 meters in height with a wingspan over 2.5 meters long from wingtip to wingtip, and have a typical mass of around 35 kilograms. The natural aptitude of the Avian race toward exceptional spatial awareness, both conceptually and physically, immediately lends itself to Piloting and Navigation.

Cepheus Engine SRD 46 Samardan Pre ss CHAPTER 2: SKILLS Characters in Cepheus Engine games engage in a variety of activities, using their various skills to accomplish the challenges that confront them. Skills and their usage are described in this chapter. Skill Checks Skill checks use the core task resolution system for t he Cepheus Engine to resolve actions. Whenever your character attempt s any action with a chance of failure, roll 2 D6, add any skill levels, the appropriate characteristic score modifier, and your difficulty DM. If the result equals or exceeds 8, the action succeeds. If the result is lower than 8, the action fails. The basic s of the task resolution system can be found in the Introduction chapter, under Die Rolls. Task Description Format Task descriptions can be formally written in a specific format, as follows. Task Description: Required Skill, Characteristic, Time Incremen t, Difficulty. Task Description: Describes the action of the task itself. In print, this is often italicized to help it stand out. Required Skill: The skill required for the task. Skill levels are added as a positive DM to the check. Unskilled characters suffer a -3 DM if they do not have this skill. Characteristic: The characterist ic modifier that is added to the check. Time Increment: The time range required to perform the task. Informal Skill Check Descriptions Skill checks are also informally written by Difficulty followed by Required Skill throughout this System Reference Document. For example, repairing damage on a starship in mid -combat might be a Very Difficult ( –4) Engineering task. When listed in this manner, the Referee gets to choose an appropr iate Characteristic to modify the skill check, as well as the time increment involved, if it is not already obvious from context. Untrained and Zero -Level Skills Characters can perform some tasks without any training in a skill, using only raw talent (def ined by their characteristic scores), but skilled characters tend to be better at such things. Unless the Referee says you cannot, you can always attempt tasks involving that skill even if you have no training in it. If a character has no level in a skill, then he is untrained and will suffer a –3 Dice Modifier when trying to use that skill. If a character has zero level in a skill (Skill 0), then he is competent in using that skill, but has little experience. He does not get any bonus from his skill ranks when using that skill but at least he avoids t he penalty for being untrained. Going Faster or Slower You can choose, before you roll, to move up or down one or two rows on the Time Frames table. Moving up (reducing the time increment) gives you a –1 DM f or every row you move; moving down and increasing the time taken gives you a +1 DM for every row you move. Your Referee will help adjudicate any issues that might arise from a change in the time frame. Table: Time Frames Time Frame Base Increment 1D6 seconds One second

Cepheus Engine SRD 110 Samardan Pre ss delivered when off -loaded on the surface of the destination world. This custom applies to cargo, passengers, and mail. Table: Available Freight And Passengers Starport Class Freight (tons) High Passengers Mid Passengers Low Passengers A 3D6x10 3D6 3D6 3D6 X3 B 3D6x5 2D6 3D6 3D6 X3 C 3D6x2 1D6-1 2D6 3D6 D 3D6 0 1D6-1 2D6 E 1D6 0 1d3-1 1D6-1 X No Freight 0 0 0 Bulk Cargo Ships will commonly pay their way by transport ing cargo in bulk. This is on a flat -fee basis per ton of cargo. A ship's accounts are credited with Cr1,000 per ton of cargo, upon delivery. For any given destination world, roll on the Available Freight and Passengers table to find out how many tons of f reight are available. A ship may choose to remain in port and see if new cargoes present themselves; roll again every 3 days. If desired, players may determine how much freight there is for every destination, and then choose where to go based upon profitab ility. The number of passengers must be determined at the same time as cargo; if a ship remains in port waiting for freight, passengers will find another ship, and vice versa. A ship without the capacity to carry all the available freight or passengers can take some of what is available, up to its total capacity. Passengers For any given destination world, roll on the Available Freight and Passengers table to find out how many passengers are available. A ship may choose to remain in port and see if new pas sengers present themselves; roll again every 3 days. If desired, players may determine how many passengers there are for every destination, and then choose where to go based upon profitability. The number of passengers must be determined at the same time a s cargo; if a ship remains in port waiting for more passengers, freight could be shipped out on another ship, and vice versa. Mail and Incidentals Merchant ships may receive mail delivery contracts, usually as an adjunct to their established routes. Five tons of ship cargo capacity must be committed to postal duty on a full time basis, the ship must be armed, and a gunner must be a part of the crew. The starship is paid Cr25,000 (Cr5,000 per ton of postal cargo area) for each trip made, regardless of the a ctual mail tonnage carried. Such tonnage will not exceed 5 tons per trip. Roll 1 D6-1 for the number of actual tons of mail, though the ship receives the Cr25,000 fee whether there is anything to carry, or not. Other ships may be approached to deliver priva te messages, at times through the ship's owner or captain, and at times clandestinely through a crew member. Private mail is usually intended for delivery to a specific point (such as an Explorer’s Society resort, or to a bar owner in the starport), and is generally accompanied by a Cr20 to Cr120 honorarium. The Referee should decide if a private message to is awaiting transmittal, and determine randomly which crew member is approached to carry it. Serving as a carrier for private mail also serves as an introduction to the recipient as a dependable, trustworthy person. Charters Vessels are often chartered by commercial or private concerns. The reasons vary: private transport, standby cargo capacity for a priority load, special or "discreet" deliveries, etc. The standard price to charter a non -