# Space Rules

Cepheus Engine SRD 103 Samardan Pre ss BOOK TWO: STARSHIPS AND INTERSTELLAR TRAVEL

Cepheus Engine SRD 104 Samardan Pre ss CHAPTER 6: OFF -WORLD TRAVEL Characters in science fiction don't live in a single village on a single planet all their lives. Instead, their stories often take them out of a planet -bound existence and out into the stars. Adventurers in Cepheus Engine games are no different. They will travel to different worlds, seeking out new, exciting and hopefully profitable activities to pursue. Therefore, it is important to develop an understanding of off -world travel. Off-world trav el can take one of two different forms, interplanetary travel through normal space and interstellar travel through Jump space. This chapter explores both facets. Interplanetary Travel All ship operations, including interstellar flights, involve some subli ght maneuvering. Ships making short interplanetary flights usually accelerate halfway there, then reverse thrust and decelerate the rest of the way. The Common Travel Times by Acceleration table offers rounded values for common travel times. For Referees d esiring more accuracy in their numbers, use the formula: T=2 √𝑫 𝑨 where T is time in seconds, D is distance in meters, and A is acceleration in m/sec2 Table: Common Travel Times by Acceleration Distance (km) 1-G 2-G 3-G 4-G 5-G 6-G Example 1,000 10m, 32s 7m, 27s 6m, 5s 5m, 16s 4m, 43s 4m, 18s Jump pt., plan etoid 10,000 33m, 20s 23m, 34s 19m, 15s 16m, 40s 14m, 54s 13m, 36s Typical s urface to orbit 100,000 1h, 45m 1h, 15m 1h, 1m 52m, 42s 47m, 8s 43m, 2s 160,000 2h, 13m 1h, 34m 1h, 17m 1h, 7m 59m, 38s 54m, 26s Jump pt., UWP size 1 320,000 3h, 9m 2h, 13m 1h, 49m 1h, 34m 1h, 24m 1h, 17m Jump pt., UWP size 2 480,000 3h, 51m 2h, 43m 2h, 13m 1h, 55m 1h, 43m 1h, 34m Jump pt., UWP size 3 640,000 4h, 27m 3h, 9m 2h, 34m 2h, 13m 1h, 59m 1h, 49m Jump pt., UWP size 4 800,000 4h, 58m 3h, 31m 2h, 52m 2h, 29m 2h, 13m 2h, 2m Jump pt., UWP size 5 960,000 5h, 27m 3h, 51m 3h, 9m 2h, 43m 2h, 26m 2h, 13m Jump pt., UWP size 6 1,000,000 5h, 33m 3h, 56m 3h, 12m 2h, 47m 2h, 29m 2h, 16m 1,120,000 5h, 53m 4h, 9m 3h, 24m 2h, 56m 2h, 38m 2h, 24m Jump pt., UWP size 7 1,280,000 6h, 17m 4h, 27m 3h, 38m 3h, 9m 2h, 49m 2h, 34m Jump pt., UWP size 8 1,440,000 6h, 40m 4h, 43m 3h, 51m 3h, 20m 2h, 59m 2h, 43m Jump pt., UWP size 9 1,600,000 7h, 2m 4h, 58m 4h, 3m 3h, 31m 3h, 9m 2h, 52m Jump pt., UWP size A 5,000,000 12h, 25m 8h, 47m 7h, 10m 6h, 13m 5h, 33m 5h, 4m Jump pt., small gg 10,000,000 17h, 34m 12h, 25m 10h, 9m 8h, 47m 7h, 51m 7h, 10m Jump pt., large gg 45,000,000 1d, 13h 1d, 2h 21h, 31m 18h, 38m 16h, 40m 15h, 13m Close neighbor 100,000,000 2d, 8h 1d, 15h 1d, 8h 1d, 4h 1d, 1h 22h, 41m 255,000,000 3d, 17h 2d, 15h 2d, 3h 1d, 20h 1d, 16h 1d, 12h Far neighbor 600,000,000 5d, 16h 4d, 0h 3d, 7h 2d, 20h 2d, 13h 2d, 8h Close gas giant 900,000,000 6d, 23h 4d, 22h 4d, 0h 3d, 11h 3d, 3h 2d, 20h Far gas giant 1,000,000,000 7d, 8h 5d, 4h 4d, 5h 3d, 16h 3d, 7h 3d, 0h Interstellar Travel Interstellar flights require the use of Jump drive. Jump is also often used for long -distance flights within a solar system, where the real -space transit time would be greater than the 1 -week Jump time. A ship can only safely Jump when it is more than one hundred diameters distant from any object. Gravity can cause a Jump bubble to

Cepheus Engine SRD 105 Samardan Pre ss collapse prematurely, bringing a ship back into normal space early. To enter Jump, a vessel needs a properly aligned hull Jump grid, a suitable set of course vectors (called a Jump Plot), and a working and properly fueled Jump drive. The Jump grid allows the Jump field to properly form around the ship and protect it from Jump space. A damaged or misaligned grid can cause a ship to misjump, or to suffer Jump Intrusions while in Jump space. In the worst -case scenario, a ship with a damaged drive or a distorted grid may be destroyed at entry or breakout. A Jump Plot is also required. A Jump Plot can be created by a navigator using the ship’s computer. In addition, a ll Class -D and better starports can provide pre -calculated jump plots for any populated worlds within jump range for Cr1,000 per jump number. Each jump course tape provides the jump plot necessary to perfo rm a jump from one specific world to a specific destination, and become increasingly less reliable as they get older. Creating a Jump Plot is an Easy (+4) Education -based Navigation skill check taking 1D6 kiloseconds, modified by the Jump distance (thus, a Jump –4 gives a –4 DM to the check). If the check is failed, then the navigator must plot the Jump again, or the starship suffers a misjump. A Jump cannot be made until the navigation calculations are complete. Jump Plots can be created in advance, but qui ckly become out of date. When the ship is ready to Jump, the engineer must properly divert power to the Jump drive. Firing the Jump drive is an Average (+0) Education -based Engineer check taking 10 –60 seconds. The Effect of this check aids the Jump Success roll. All normal Jumps take roughly one week (148+6 D6 hours), and are subject to random variations in the point of emergence. The older a plot is, the more variance there is in the actual Jump performance. Thus course tapes tend to err on the side of caut ion, and give emergence points a long way out from the destination world. A Jump carries the vessel a number of parsecs equal to the Jump number. Jumps of less than one parsec (less than three light years, or one hex) are possible, and count as Jump –1 for the purposes of navigation and fuel expenditure. Jump Success Roll Roll 2 D6 and add the following DMs. If the result is 0 or less, the ship misjumps. If the result is 8+ the Jump is accurate. Any other result is an inaccurate Jump. If a Jump was made usin g a bad Jump Plot, the ship automatically misjumps. + the Effect of the divert power Engineer check –1 per month that the Jump Plot is out of date (such as when using older Jump course tapes) –2 per Jump drive hit –2 for using Unrefined fuel –8 if s till within the hundred -diameter limit at the time of Jump Jump Failures and Misjumps When a starship suffers an inaccurate Jump, the vessel emerges from Jump in the wrong part of the target star system, requiring 1 D6 days travel through normal space. Whe n a starship misjumps, the ship ends up 1 D6x1D6 parsecs in a random direction. In both cases, the emergence is extremely hard. The vessel takes the equivalent of a critical hit from the discordant transition. In addition, everyone aboard the vessel suffers severe headaches, nausea and even nosebleeds for several hours before and after the ship emerges from Jump space. Starship Operations Standard procedures exist to govern how a starship goes about its business and handles emergency situations. Under norma l circumstances, a ship will not deviate from these procedures. A captain whose vessel ignores standard operating procedure will usually have to explain himself to a patrol vessel or the local port authority.

Cepheus Engine SRD 106 Samardan Pre ss Ship ’s Passage A ship must provide sufficien t accommodation for its crew; normally this means one stateroom per two crewmembers (this is termed double -occupancy). Any remaining stateroom space may be used to carry passengers. Passengers cannot share accommodation with crew, with the exception of wor king passage. Normally, one passenger per small stateroom and two per large stateroom room can be carried. Passenger travel can be classified into five overarching categories – high, middle, low, working and stowaway. High Passage: The best method of trav el is called high passage, which involves first class accommodations and cuisine. High passengers have the services of the ship's steward, entertainment and complete attention to their comfort. There is a baggage allowance of up to 1,000 kilograms. High pa ssage costs Cr10,000 and provides food and lodging for 1 person for a distance of 1 jump. Double occupancy is allowed at a discounted rate of Cr16,000 (Cr8000 per passenger). Each level of Steward skill (including level 0) allows the steward to effectively look after two high passage passengers on board a ship (so a character with Steward 2 could care for six passengers). Middle Passage: In order for starships to fill their staterooms with passengers, middle passage is offered on a standby basis, in the eve nt that not enough high passages are sold. While middle passengers occupy staterooms normally similar to those occupied by high passengers, they do not receive the service or entertainment accorded the higher paying passengers. In addition, the quality of the cuisine is rather low. Baggage totaling 100 kilograms is allowed. A middle passenger may be 'bumped' and the stateroom taken by a late arriving high passenger; the middle passenger's ticket is returned, but no other compensation is made. (The middle co uld then buy a high passage and 'bump' another middle passenger, if the extra cost seemed worth it. Middle passage costs Cr8,000 and provides food and lodging for 1 person for a distance of 1 jump. Double occupancy is allowed at a discounted rate of Cr13,0 00 (Cr6500 per passenger). Each level of the Steward skill (including level 0) allows the steward to c are for five middle passengers. Low Passage: Transportation while in cold sleep (suspended animation) is possible at relatively low cost to the passenger. The passenger is placed in a low passage berth before the ship takes off, and travels the entire journey in a state of suspended animation. He does not age, and requires very little life support. Unfortunately, the low passage system involves some intrin sic dangers to the passenger, and he runs some risk of not surviving the voyage. Therefore a qualified medic should always be in attendance when reviving passengers from low berths. When a passenger is revived from cold sleep, they must make an Easy (+4) E ndurance check; failure means that the passenger dies during revival. If a medic is present, the medic may assist the passenger with an Education -based Routine (+2) Medicine skill check, as per the Aid Another rules. Low passage costs Cr1,000 and includes a 10 kg baggage allowance; many commercial cryoberth units have a built -in baggage compartment. Working Passage: A starship captain with a crew shortage may hire an individual to fill the vacant position, paying not money but passage in return. Working pas sage may not continue for more than three jumps, or the individual is considered to have been hired for standard salary. In order to be hired for working passage, the individual must have some expertise in the position for which he is hired. Baggage totali ng 1,000 kilograms is allowed. Stowaway: A stowaway is a person who secretly boards a vessel in order to travel without paying and without being detected. Unnoticed by the captain, crew, port officials and customs authorities, stowaways may gain access to a vessel with or without the assistance of port personnel. Once on board the ship, stowaways often hide in empty containers, cargo holds, maintenance shafts, crawl spaces, storage rooms, engine rooms, unused staterooms, and behind false panels. Stowaways r isk imprisonment or heavy fines if caught, as it is considered a crime in most jurisdictions. If caught at the destination world, stowaways may be deported. Should this occur, the travel costs for the stowaway's return to the previous world visited, per th e ship's logs, can become the obligation of the ship's owner or captain. Because of this, most commanders do not take kindly to any stowaways they discover aboard their vessels, and have been known to space them.

Cepheus Engine SRD 107 Samardan Pre ss Standard Operating Procedures Most comme rcial starships follow a simple schedule, spending one week in Jump space and one week in normal space, taking care of business. Once a ship emerges from Jump space, it travels to the destination world, where passengers disembark, old cargo is unloaded and new cargo replaces it, the crew performs routine ship maintenance and refueling, new passengers come aboard the vessel, and then the starship travels to a Jump point in preparation for entering Jump space and traveling to the ship’s next destination. Non -commercial starships typically follow a similar schedule. Without the obligations of passengers or cargo, however, these vessels can choose to travel much faster. The week in -system can be reduced to simply refueling by the quickest means possible and then making the next Jump. When a vessel first emerges from Jump space, the first course of action is to scan normal space for potential dangers. Once the commander determines that the vessel is safe, the navigator then determines the ship's location in normal Space and plots a course to the ship's destination in -system. The commander may want to skim a local gas giant for free fuel. If so, the pilot achieves orbit and skims the "surface" of the gas giant for fuel. Scooping a gas giant for fuel takes 1 D6 hours per 40 tons of fuel. When the fuel tanks are full, the pilot can then take the ship back out to a Jump point to leave for the next system, or travel to another destination in -system, such as a local world. If the commander wishes to visit a local world, su ch as the mainworld, the pilot follows a course laid out by the navigator to the destination. After arriving at the world, the pilot achieves orbit and then proceeds to either the orbital starport or surface starport. Once docked at the starport, the vesse l unloads any high passengers, followed by mail, middle passengers, cargo and finally low passengers. The ship refuels, if needed, and renews its life support. If the ship’s owner or captain is interested in speculative trading, they then sell off speculat ive cargo and buy new cargo to replace it, if they find any good deals. In addition, the commander or purser addresses all ship's business, including paying the ship expenses. While on planet, crew members may explore local areas of interest, hire new crew to fill any available positions, and even take on the occasional odd job. When the commander determines it is time to depart, cargo handlers load all cargo into the vessel. Low passengers are then put into cryoberths. High passengers are then escorted to their staterooms, followed by mid passengers, if any staterooms remain available. Finally, vessels with a mail contract load up on outgoing mail. Income is collected and placed into the ship's accounts. After getting clearance from starport control, the pi lot takes the ship into orbit. The navigator then plots a course through normal space to a Jump point. As the pilot takes the vessel to the Jump point, the navigator works out the Jump plot. Once at the Jump point, the engineer diverts power to the Jump dr ive, and the ship enters Jump space. Along the way, the vessel may encounter other ships. Gas giants are often used by pirates to attack unsuspecting vehicles, so system defense boats are prevalent in the region. Patrol vessels may hail a ship as it travel s to and from the Jump point. Port authorities may perfo rm a customs inspection before allowing a ship to dock at the starport. Other ships, civilian and military, commercial and non -commercial, may be travelling in and out of the system. Starship Expense s The primary expenses for a starship are the ship’s mortgage or debts, crew salaries, fuel, life support, port fees and routine maintenance. Mortgage or Debts If the crew is paying off debts on their spacecraft, then these debts must be paid each month. The standard terms for a ship mortgage are paying 1/240th of the cash price each month for 480 months (40 years). In effect, interest and bank financing cost a simple 120% of the final cost of the ship, and the total financed price equals

Cepheus Engine SRD 109 Samardan Pre ss Fuel Refined fuel may be purchased at any class A or B starport for Cr500 per ton delivered at t he starport. If fuel must be ferried out to a ship, add Cr100 per ton to the cost. Refined fuel may also be obtained by running unrefined fuel through a Fuel Purification System installed onboard a ship. Refined fuel decreases the chance of a problem occur ring with a ship's power plant, maneuver drive, and Jump drive. Unrefined fuel is available for Cr100 per ton from any class A, B, or C starport delivered at the starport. If fuel must be ferried out to a ship, add Cr100 per ton to the cost. Unrefined fuel is also available for free from the following sources: Water: On worlds with a hydrographic rating of 1 or higher, a ship may land near an open body of water or ice and pump fuel into their fuel tanks for free. Using water as fuel in this manner is consid ered to be running unrefined fuel. Note that many worlds may not allow ships to land and fuel for free, preferring to control the availability of fuel from the starport only, thus earning the revenue from the operation. Gas Giants: Streamlined ships equipp ed with fuel scoops may dive into the upper atmosphere of a gas giant and fill their tanks with unrefined hydrogen. Larger ships may use streamlined fuel shuttles to ferry fuel loads back to the main ship as needed to refill the tanks. Scooping takes 1 D6 hours per 40 tons of fuel. There are no fees associated with 'skimming' a gas giant for fuel, but these are also often the favorite point of attack for pirates. Fuel skimmed from a gas giant is considered to be unrefined. Life Support Each stateroom on a s hip costs Cr 2,000 per month, occupied or not. This cost covers supplies for the life support system as well as food and water, although meals at this level will be rather spartan. E ach low passage berth costs Cr 100 per month. A spacecraft with power can su stain life support for one person per stateroom for one month comfortably, and for six months at a stretch (number of staterooms × 5,000 person/hours). Without power, this drops to two weeks at most. Life support supplies can be purchased in bulk. One ton of life support supplies will provide 20 passengers or crew with life support for one month, at a cost of Cr54,000. One ton of luxury life support supplies costs Cr72,000, and covers the same number of people for the same amount of time. Port Fees It typ ically costs Cr 100 to berth f or 6 days in a starport, and Cr 100 a day thereafter. Routine Maintenance A ship needs maintenance, which costs 0.1% (1/1000th) of the total cost of the ship per year and requires a shipyard. Maintenance should be carried out e ach month. If maintenance is skipped or skimped on, roll 2 D6 each month, with a +DM equal to the number of months skipped. On an 8+, the ship takes damage to a random system. Roll on the System Degradation table for the number of hits. Repair supplies cost Cr10,000/ton. Table: System Degradation Roll Number of Hits 1–3 1 4–5 2 6 3 Starship Revenue Starships generate revenue by carrying passengers, cargo, mail and charters. Goods taken on in orbit are delivered when placed in orbit around the destinati on. Goods taken on a planetary surface are considered to be

Cepheus Engine SRD 112 Samardan Pre ss Landing Any ship with a standard or streamlined hull may land on the surface. Unstreamlined ships suffer a –2 DM to any Pilot checks made in atmosphere while a ship with a Distributed hull suffers a –4 DM to any Pilot checks, and is likely to tak e severe structural damage if it lands. Landing at a starport is a Routine (+2) task for most ships taking 10 –60 seconds. Most ships have landing gear, allowing them to touch down ‘in the wild’, which requires an Average (+0), Difficult ( –2) or even Very D ifficult ( –4) check, depending on local conditions. Non -distributed ships can also land on bodies of water without sinking. Failing a landing roll means that the ship has landed improperly or even crashed. Ship Security The primary goal of a starship's or vessel's security measures is to protect the safety of the ship and crew. Particularly on frontier worlds and lawless backwater planets, starships are at risk to a number of factors, including hijackers, piracy, sabotage, subversion and terrorism. Ship se curity exists on multiple levels to prevent this from happening. These can be grouped broadly into the categories of physical security and cybersecurity. Physical Security Systems Physical security systems for vessels are generally intended to deter poten tial intruders (e.g. warning signs); detect intrusions and monitor/record intruders (e.g. intruder alarms and internal monitoring); and trigger appropriate incident responses (e.g. by security personnel or the ship's crew in general). Numerous systems have proven useful. Physical barriers such as airlocks act as the outermost layer of security. They serve to prevent, or at least delay, attacks, and also act as a psychological deterrent by making intrusions difficult. Even within the ship, bulkheads and pane ls can be locked to limit or slow access. The means of authorization for different locking systems is captured in the Restricted Access Security table. It should be noted that the ship's computer can open or close any non -mechanical lock remotely, as well as report on a door's status. Ship security systems can detect intrusion detection through a variety of means. Cameras, accessible to any authorized personnel, monitor public areas. Internal sensors such as motion detectors in key traffic areas and life su pport detectors (for unexpected changes in oxygen levels) provide additional methods of detecting intrusion. Table: Restricted Access Security Type TL Means of Access Override Skill External Door Internal Door Biometrics 8 DNA test, palm print, retinal scan, voiceprint Electronics Formidable ( -6) Very Difficult ( -4) Electronic Lock 7 Keycard or combination Electronics Very Difficult ( -4) Difficult ( -2) Intelligent 9 Granted by ship's computer Electronics Formidable ( -6) Very Difficult ( -4) Mechanical L ock 4 Key or combination Mechanics Difficult ( -2) Average (+0) Cybersecurity The security of a ship's computer is only as good as the Security software that's been installed. All starships come with Security/0 installed, but a wise ship's owner will inve st in more advanced security programs, whenever possible. Most vessels run Security/2 programs, at a minimum. The Cybersecurity Tasks table outlines the difficulties of certain tasks that might be attempted by hijackers and pirates. All tasks require the C omputer skill.

Cepheus Engine SRD 122 Samardan Pre ss Ship Drives A non -starship must have a maneuver drive (M-Drive) and a power plant (P-Plant). A starship must have a Jump drive (J-Drive) and a power plant; a maneuver drive may also be installed, but is not required. Table: Drive Costs Drive Code J-Drive Tons MCr M-Drive Tons MCr P-Plant Tons MCr A 10 10 2 4 4 8 B 15 20 3 8 7 16 C 20 30 5 12 10 24 D 25 40 7 16 13 32 E 30 50 9 20 16 40 F 35 60 11 24 19 48 G 40 70 13 28 22 56 H 45 80 15 32 25 64 J 50 90 17 36 28 72 K 55 100 19 40 31 80 L 60 110 21 44 34 88 M 65 120 23 48 37 96 N 70 130 25 52 40 104 P 75 140 27 56 43 112 Q 80 150 29 60 46 120 R 85 160 31 64 49 128 S 90 170 33 68 52 136 T 95 180 35 72 55 144 U 100 190 37 76 58 152 V 105 200 39 80 61 160 W 110 210 41 84 64 168 X 115 220 43 88 67 176 Y 120 230 45 92 70 182 Z 125 240 47 96 73 192 Table: Drive Performance by Hull Volume, Smaller Hulls 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900 1000 A 2 1 – – – – – – – – B 4 2 1 1 – – – – – – C 6 3 2 1 1 1 – – – – D – 4 2 2 1 1 1 1 – – E – 5 3 2 2 1 1 1 1 1 F – 6 4 3 2 2 1 1 1 1 G – – 4 3 2 2 2 2 1 1 H – – 5 4 3 2 2 2 2 2 J – – 6 4 3 3 2 2 2 2 K – – – 5 4 3 3 3 2 2 L – – – 5 4 3 3 3 3 3 M – – – 6 4 4 3 3 3 3

Cepheus Engine SRD 123 Samardan Pre ss N – – – 6 5 4 4 4 3 3 P – – – – 5 4 4 4 4 4 Q – – – – 6 5 4 4 4 4 R – – – – 6 5 5 5 4 4 S – – – – 6 5 5 5 5 5 T – – – – – 6 5 5 5 5 U – – – – – 6 6 5 5 5 V – – – – – 6 6 6 5 5 W – – – – – – 6 6 6 5 X – – – – – – 6 6 6 6 Y – – – – – – 6 6 6 6 Z – – – – – – 6 6 6 6 Table: Drive Performance by Hull Volume, Larger Hulls 1200 1400 1600 1800 2000 3000 4000 5000 A – – – – – – – – B – – – – – – – – C – – – – – – – – D – – – – – – – – E – – – – – – – – F 1 – – – – – – – G 1 1 – – – – – – H 1 1 1 – – – – – J 2 1 1 1 – – – – K 2 2 1 1 1 – – – L 2 2 2 1 1 – – – M 3 2 2 2 1 – – – N 3 3 2 2 2 – – – P 3 3 3 2 2 – – – Q 4 3 3 3 2 1 – – R 4 4 3 3 3 1 – – S 4 4 4 3 3 1 – – T 5 4 4 4 3 2 – – U 5 4 4 4 4 2 – – V 5 5 4 4 4 2 1 – W 5 5 4 4 4 3 1 1 X 5 5 5 4 4 3 1 1 Y 5 5 5 4 4 3 2 1 Z 6 5 5 5 4 4 2 2 For maneuver drives, the potential is the Thrust number (Tn), which is the number of Gs accelerati on available. For Jump drives, the potential is the Jump number ( Jn), or Jump range in parsecs. The power plant rating (A -Z) must be at least equal to either the maneuver drive or Jump drive rating, whichever is higher.

Cepheus Engine SRD 124 Samardan Pre ss Fuel Fuel needed for a Jump depends on the size of the ship and the length of the Jump and is calculated as 0.1 x Hull tonnage x Jump distance. A single Jump of that distance consumes that much fuel. The amount of fuel required by the power plant depends on the tonnage of the power plant itself, and is calculated as one-third of the power plant tonnage per week, rounded down to the nearest ton. Space -faring vessels require a minimum of two weeks’ worth of fuel for the power plant. Deep space vessels may store four, six or even eight weeks of power plant fuel. For your convenience, the Power Plant Fuel Requirements tab le provides calculated values for both the fuel per week and minimum fuel volume by Drive C ode. Table: Power Plant Fuel Requirements Drive Code P-Plant (tons) Fuel/Wk (tons) Min. Fuel Volume A 4 1 2 B 7 2 4 C 10 3 6 D 13 4 8 E 16 5 10 F 19 6 12 G 22 7 14 H 25 8 16 J 28 9 18 K 31 10 20 L 34 11 22 M 37 12 24 N 40 13 26 P 43 14 28 Q 46 15 30 R 49 16 32 S 52 17 34 T 55 18 36 U 58 19 38 V 61 20 40 W 64 21 42 X 67 22 44 Y 70 23 46 Z 73 24 48 Bridge The size of the bridge varies de pending on the size of the ship. The cost for the ship’s bridge is MCr0.5 per 100 tons of ship. Table: Bridge Size Ship Size Bridge Size 200 tons or less 10 tons 300 tons – 1000 tons 20 tons 1,100 – 2000 tons 40 tons More than 2,000 tons 60 tons

Cepheus Engine SRD 160 Samardan Pre ss Bay A random bay is hit. First Hit: The bay's targeting mechanis m is damaged. It can still be used, but all attacks suffer a –2 DM. Second Hit: The bay weapon is disabled. Third Hit: The bay weapon is destroyed. Subsequent Hits: Count as Structure hits. J-Drive The Jump drive is hit. First Hit: All attempts at Jump su ffer a –2 DM to Engineering checks. Second Hit: The jump drive is disabled. Third Hit: The jump drive is destroyed. Subsequent Hits: Count as Structure hits. M-Drive The maneuver drive is hit. First Hit: Reduce the ship's thrust by one. Second Hit: Reduce the ship's thrust by 50%. Third Hit: The drive is disabled. Subsequent Hits: Count as Hull hits. Power Plant The power plant is hit. First Hit: Damaged. Second Hit: The crew suffers a Crew Hit, rolling on the Radiation Damage column. Third Hit: The Power Plant is destroyed and the ship is disabled. Subsequent Hits: Count as Structure Hits. Sensors The sensors are hit. First Hit: –2 DM to all Comms checks to use sensors. Second Hit: Sensors are disabled preventing the ship from making Comms checks for usi ng sensors and on making attacks on targets beyond Adjacent range. Third Hit: Sensors are destroyed. Subsequent Hits: Count as Hull hits. Bridge The bridge is hit. First Hit: The crew suffers a Crew Hit, rolling on the Normal Damage column. Second Hit: The bridge is disabled. Until the bridge is repaired, the ship cannot take any Pilot or Sensor actions, it cannot jump, and any attacks suffer a –2 DM. Third Hit: The bridge is destroyed. Subsequent Hits: Count as Structure Hits. Fuel The fuel is hit. First Hit: Causes a minor fuel leak of 1 D6 tons per hour. Second Hit: Destroys 1 D6x10% of stored fuel.