# Trade Rules

Cepheus Engine SRD 1 Samardan Pre ss Cepheus Engine System Reference Document A Classic Era Science Fiction 2 D6-Based Open Gaming System By Jason “Flynn” Kemp Copyright © 2016 Samardan Press Cepheus Engine and Samardan Press are trademarks of Jason “Flynn” Kemp Credits Proofreading: Jeff H opper Designation of Open Game Content All of the text in this document is designated as Open Gaming Content, except for the titles of products published by Samardan Press, and the trademarks “Cepheus Engine” and “Samardan Press”. Designation of Product Identity Any title of a product published by Samardan Press is designated as Product Identity. Please Note: This Product is derived from the Traveller System Reference Document and other Open Gaming Content made available by the Open Gaming License, and d oes not contain closed content from products published by either Mongoose Publishing or Far Future Enterprises. This Product is not affiliated with either Mongoose Publishing or Far Future Enterprises, and it makes no claim to or challenge to any trademark s held by either entity. The use of the Traveller System Reference Document does not convey the endorsement of this Product by either Mongoose Publishing or Far Future Enterprises as a product of either of their product lines.

Cepheus Engine SRD 10 Samardan Pre ss Practice Trade and Commerce..................... 200 Patron Encounter Creation.......................... 200 CHAPTER 17: ADVENTURES.................................. 201 Conflict............................................................. 201 The Plot............................................................ 201 The EPIC Adventure System............................. 201 The Cast of Characters................................. 201 The Background........................................... 201 Minor Scenes............................................... 202 Plot Keys....................................................... 202 Chapters....................................................... 202 Adventure Checklist..................................... 202 Adventures in Five Acts.................................... 203 The Story Hook............................................ 203 The Escalation.............................................. 203 The Complication......................................... 203 The C limax.................................................... 203 The Reward.................................................. 204 Other Suggestions........................................ 204 The Three -Dimensional Campaign................... 204 The Rule of Three......................................... 204 LEGAL.................................................................... 205 Publishing Your Own Materials........................ 205 The Cepheus Engine Comp atibility -Statement License (CSL)................................................ 205 OPEN GAME LICENSE Version 1.0a.................. 206

Cepheus Engine SRD 27 Samardan Pre ss Career Descriptions The following twenty -four career paths are detailed at the end of this chapter:  Aerospace System D efense: Member of a planetary armed military force operating within a world's atmosphere and close orbit. Also known as the "planetary air force".  Agent: Individual that secretly collects and reports information on the activities, movements and plans of a political or corporate enemy or competitor. Also known as a spy or intelligence operative.  Athlete: Individual that has achieved celebrity status for their proficiency in sports and other forms of physical exercise.  Barbarian: Individual from a primitive w orld (TL4 or less) capable of surviving on their world without support from a technologically advanced civilization.  Belter: Individual that explores asteroid belts in search of mineral deposits and salvageable material for profit.  Bureaucrat: Official in a government department, charged with following the details of administrative process.  Colonist: Individual that moves to a new world or settles in a new planetary colony.  Diplomat: Individual that is appointed by a planetary or interstellar government to conduct official negotiations and maintain political, economic and social relations with another polity or polities.  Drifter: Individual that continually moves from place to place, without any fixed home or job.  Entertainer: Individual that has achieved c elebrity status for their proficiency in publicly entertaining others.  Hunter: Individual that kills or traps large game, almost always large terrestrial mammals, for meat, other animal by -products (such as horn or bone), trophy or sport.  Marine: Member o f an interstellar armed military force trained to serve in a variety of environments, often carried on board starships as an adjunct to an interstellar navy. Also known as the "space marines".  Maritime System Defense: Member of a planetary armed military f orce operating within and on the surface of a world's oceans. Also known as the "planetary wet navy".  Mercenary: Professional soldier hired to serve in a foreign military force or perform a specific military action.  Merchant: Individual involved in wholesa le interstellar trade, particularly between individual worlds or polities.  Navy: Member of an interstellar armed military force that conducts military operations in interplanetary or interstellar space. Also known as the "space navy".  Noble: Member of an e lite upper class, having high social or political status.  Physician: Individual that is skilled in the science of medicine and is trained and licensed to treat sick and injured people.  Pirate: Individual that attacks and steals from interplanetary and inte rstellar ships in space.  Rogue: Individual that makes their living through illicit means.  Scientist: Individual that is engaged in and has expert knowledge of a science, especially a biological or physical science.  Scout: Member of an interplanetary explor atory service, surveying unfamiliar territory in space.  Surface System Defense: Member of a planetary armed military force operating on the non -hydrographic surface of a world. Also known as the "planetary army".  Technician: Individual that is skilled in m echanical or industrial techniques or in a particular technical field. Qualifying and the Draft The Qualification check determines if you can successfully enter into your chosen career. Military careers use Enlistment as the description for this roll inst ead of qualification. If you fail this check then you cannot enter your chosen career this term. You must either submit to the Draft or take the Drifter career for this term. You

Cepheus Engine SRD 53 Samardan Pre ss Leadership The character possesses the ability to rally, inspire, organize and direct team efforts to ensure the best cooperation and productivity possible. Coordinating Effort: Whenever a task requires one or more characters to combine their efforts (i.e. Teamwork; each makes a skill or ability check towards a common goal), the character gains a pool of points equal to the Effect of the skill check (minimum of 1), which can be distributed by the leader to individual team members as DMs (grant a +1 DM per point) on skill or ability checks made toward the common goal. Improving Initiative: The Leadership skill can be used to increase another character's Initiative. The character with Leadership makes a Leadership check, and the target character's Initia tive is increased by the Effect of the check. Making a Leadership skill check is a significant action. Linguistics The character can read and write a different language for every level of Linguistics they possess. All characters can speak and read their n ative language without needing the Linguistics skill, and automated computer translator programs mean that the Linguistics skill are not always needed on other worlds. Having Linguistics -0 implies that the character has a smattering of simple phrases in ma ny languages. In addition, Linguistics can be used to attempt to decipher the general meaning of a preserved specimen of language, such as an inscription or a recorded message. Liaison The character is trained in the art of dealing with others, including knowledge of proper protocols, manners of address, codes of conduct and other information needed when dealing with a wide range of societal types. Such a character is quite useful when attempting to negotiate a particularly edgy deal, to convince the Duke' s secretary to admit the party into the Duke's presence, help settle a dispute between two opposing groups, or other acts of negotiation and diplomacy. Influencing Others: The character can change others' attitudes with a successful check. In negotiations, participants roll opposed Liaison checks to see who gains the advantage. Opposed checks also resolve cases when two diplomats are engaged in negotiations. Life Sciences This skill represents theoretical and practical knowledge derived from the scientific study of living organisms. This covers a wide range of related fields, such as biochemistry, biology, botany, cybernetics, genetics, physiology and psionocology. Mechanics The character is practiced in installing, using, maintaining, repairing and/or cre ating mechanical devices and equipment. The character can practice a trade and make a decent living, earning a paycheck for every week of dedicated work. The character knows how to use the tools of the trade, how to perform routine tasks, how to supervise untrained helpers, and how to handle common problems. Disabling Devices: The character is skilled at disabling mechanical alarm systems, picking mechanical locks, or similar tasks involving mechanical devices. Medicine The individual has training and skil l in the medical arts and sciences, from diagnosis and triage to surgery and other corrective treatments. This skill represents a character's ability to provide emergency care, short term care, long -term care, and specialized treatment for diseases, poison s and debilitating injuries. When treating a patient of a race other than their own, the character suffers a -2 DM.

Cepheus Engine SRD 111 Samardan Pre ss starship is Cr1 per ton per hour, usually with a twelve -hour minimum. Charter price for a starship is computed based on its capacity. Starships are chartered in 2 -week blocks; the charge is Cr900 per ton of cargo hold p lus Cr9,000 per high passage berth and Cr900 per low passage berth. The owner pays all overhead and supplies a crew. Speculative Trading A trader with cargo space available and free capital with which to speculate may seek out suitable goods to buy and se ll. A complete Trade and Commerce system is presented in Chapter 7: Trade and Commerce. Miscellaneous Topics The following topics relate to aspects of starship operations that might impact an adventurer’s experience over the course of a Cepheus Engine adv enture or campaign. Airlocks A ship has at least one airlock per 100 tons. The average airlock is large enough for three people in vacc suits to pass through at the same time. An airlock takes ten seconds to cycle. Under normal circumstances, airlocks are locked down from the bridge and require a Very Difficult ( –4) Engineer (electronics) check to override. An unlocked airlock can be triggered from outside. Airlocks generally have vacc suits, rescue bubbles and cutlasses in a ship’s locker nearby. Ships w ith cargo space have cargo hatches, allowing up to 10% of their cargo to be transferred at any time. Distress Signals A distress signal indicates that a person or group of people, vessel, small craft, or other vehicle is threatened by grave and imminent d anger and requests immediate assistance. The use of distress signals under other circumstances is against most system and interstellar laws; in fact, most jurisdictions have large penalties for false, unwarranted or prank distress signals. Given the vastne ss of interplanetary space, help is hard to come by. Therefore, most interstellar and interplanetary governments mandate that the commander or master of any vessel that detects a distress signal is legally obligated to either respond and offer assistance o r contact the authorities to report the signal. Some pirates have been known to use false distress signals to lure other vessels into a trap. This behavior has created significant mistrust of distress signals among civilian starship commanders, but inters tellar law still requires that assistance be rendered if authorities cannot be reached within a reasonable time period. In the event that the commander of a vessel is unable or unwilling to respond to such a call, they are required by law to officially log their reason for not doing so into the ship's logs. Such commanders can be held accountable for their decision, and can pay a fine on some worlds that could exceed Cr1,000,000 (or MCr1), as well as serve time in prison. Docking Two spacecraft may dock if they are close together and neither ship attempts to resist the docking maneuver. Many airlock designs across charted space are compatible; for incompatible airlocks, ships extend flexible plastic docking tubes that adapt to the target airlock. Docking wi th another vessel is a Routine (+2) Pilot task taking 1 –6 minutes. If one ship is drifting or unpowered, the difficulty rises to Difficult ( –2). Boarding Hostile boarding actions are safest when the enemy ship is crippled, in which case it is a standard docking procedure. If the enemy ship is still moving, then the prospective boarders must match the target’s velocity and dock with it (a Difficult ( –2) Pilot task), or else just land on the hull and either make their way to an airlock or cut through from o utside.

Cepheus Engine SRD 117 Samardan Pre ss *Note: Unusual cargo covers unique or highly unusual items, such as alien artifacts, high tech prototypes, stolen artwork of antiquity, or unique lifeforms. Such items often form the seed for an adventure. Determine Purchase Price Determin ing the purchase price for speculative cargo is based on the results of a skill check. The results of this skill check represents the best possible offer the parties can reach under the current conditions. Determining the purchase price: Broker, Intellige nce or Social Standing, 1 D6 kiloseconds, Average (+0). The skill check is further modified by adding the largest Dice Modif ier that applies from the Purchase DM column, subtracting the largest Dice Modifier that applies from the Sale DM column, and subtra cting any Dice Modifiers from the supplier (such as their Broker skill). Some especially rich or powerful su ppliers can demand high prices. In cases where multiple Purchase or Sale DMs apply, use only the largest ones from each column. The Referee should then consult the Purchase column of the Modified Price table, using the skill check result to determine the Purchase Price percentage. The final price of the speculative cargo is the Base Price multiplied by the Purchase Price percentage. The trader does n ot have to accept this price, but if he rejects the deal, then he cannot deal with that supplier again for at least one week. After that week, he may attempt a new skill check to determine the purchase price for those goods. Table: Modified Price Table Result Purchase Sale 2- 200% 40% 3 180% 50% 4 160% 60% 5 140% 70% 6 120% 80% 7 110% 90% 8 100% 100% 9 90% 110% 10 80% 120% 11 70% 140% 12 60% 160% 13 50% 180% 14 40% 200% 15 30% 300% 16+ 20% 400% Local Brokers A speculative trader can hire a local broker to represent him in trade negotiations. This allows the merchant to use the broker’s skill levels instead of their own, although that comes at a price in the form of a percentage of the final negotiated price, which must be paid even if the merchant decides not to sell his goods. The Local Broker table indicates the commission charged for a given skill level, as well as indicating what maximum skill levels are commonly availabl e for a given class of starport.

Cepheus Engine SRD 118 Samardan Pre ss Table: Local Brokers Skill Le vel Commission Notes 1 5% Max for Class D or E Starport 2 10% Max for Class C Starport 3 15% Max for Class B Starport 4 20% Max for Class A Starport Selling Goods Selling goods works just like purchasing goods, with the following changes: A character must find a buyer, instead of a supplier. The same rules apply. When selling goods, add the largest Sale DMs for the world trade code and subtract the largest Purchase DMs. If a character does not accept the price offered for his goods, he must find anoth er buyer or wait a week, in which case he may attempt a new skill check to determine the selling price.

Cepheus Engine SRD 133 Samardan Pre ss Some of these drives consume much less fuel or allow much faster travel than the Jump drive, so introducing these drives will vastly impact the carrying capacity of a starship, the profitability of trade, the speed of communication and so forth. Warp Drive The ship warps space around it, allowing it to move fast er-than -light while staying in our universe. A warp drive does not have a maximum range – instead, the ship’s drive rating indicates the number of parsecs crossed per week of travel. Warp travel consumes fuel at twice the normal rate for the ship’s power p lant rather than needing a single massive expenditure in the manner of a Jump drive. Teleport Drive The ship instantaneously jumps from one point to another. This works just like the standard Jump drive without the week -long wait in hyperspace. Instead, n o time whatsoever elapses during the transition from one place to another. A teleport consumes no extra fuel but jumping is a strain on the ship’s systems and multiple successive jumps can damage the drive. Hyperspace Drive The portal drive functions by o pening up a gateway into hyperspace, through which the ship can pass. When in hyperspace, the ship uses its conventional engines to travel, then opens up a second gateway back to the normal universe, effectively taking a short cut through a higher dimensio n. A hyperspace drive is limited by the size of the spacecraft that can pass through the portal – see the Hyperspace Portal Size table. A hyperspace drive consumes no extra fuel, but takes up twice as much space as a jump drive. While in hyperspace, the sp acecraft moves at a rate of one parsec per day per maneuver drive rating. Table: Hyperspace Portal Size Rating Size Rating Size A 200 N 2800 B 400 P 3000 C 800 Q 3200 D 1000 R 3400 E 1200 S 3600 F 1400 T 3800 G 1600 U 4000 H 1800 V 4200 J 2000 W 4400 K 2200 X 4600 L 2400 Y 4800 M 2600 Z 5000 Alternative Power Plants The Cepheus Engine system posits the development of highly efficient fusion power plants, but other settings may use different sources of power. Unless otherwise noted, these powe r plants use all the same rules as the standard fusion power plants. Fission Plants A fission plant requires radioactive elements as fuel. Fission drives only produce the same amount power as a fusion drive of the same type. However, they are twice the s ize and price of a fusion power plant. Fission plant

Cepheus Engine SRD 171 Samardan Pre ss Table: World Population Digit Population Range Comparison 0 None 0 1 Few 10+ A tiny farmstead or a single family 2 Hundreds 100+ A village 3 Thousands 1,000+ 4 Tens of thousands 10,000+ Small town 5 Hundreds of thousands 100,000+ Average city 6 Millions 1,000,000+ 7 Tens of mi llions 10,000,000+ Large city 8 Hundreds of millions 100,000,000+ 9 Billions 1,000,000,000+ Present day Earth 10 (A) Tens of billions 10,000,000,000+ Population Modifier Sometimes it is enough just to know that a world has hundreds of millions of pe ople on it (Population 8). Other times, a Referee or player may want a more specific number. The Population Modifier is determined by rolling 2D6-2. If the Population is greater than 0, the minimum Population Modifier value is 1. If the Population code is 0, then the Population Modifier is also 0. The Population Modifier is multiplied by 10 raised to the power of the Population code to determine a more specific number of people living on the world. For example, if the Referee generates a Population Modifier of 4 for a world with a Population code of 8, then he knows that ( 4x108, which is…) 400,000,000 people live on that world. Primary Starport Many worlds have starports, their presence being essential to interstellar trade and commerce. To determine the wo rld’s primary starport, roll 2 D6-7 and add the world’s Population value. Compare the result to the Primary Starport table to determine the starport class for the world. Each starport class offers different levels of service. The Starport Class Services tab le provides more specific details. Table: Primary Starport Roll Starport Class 2 or less X 3 E 4 E 5 D 6 D 7 C 8 C 9 B 10 B 11+ A

Cepheus Engine SRD 174 Samardan Pre ss Table: UWP Values for Trade Codes Classification Code Size Atmos. Hydro Pop. Gov. Law TL Agricultural Ag 4–9 4–8 5–7 Asteroid As 0 0 0 Barren Ba 0 0 0 Desert De 2+ 0 Fluid Oceans Fl 10+ 1+ Garden Ga 5, 6, 8 4–9 4–8 High Population Hi 9+ High Technology Ht 12+ Ice-Capped Ic 0–1 1+ Industrial In 0–2, 4, 7, 9 9+ Low Population Lo 1–3 Low Technology Lt 5- Non -Agricultural Na 0–3 0–3 6+ Non -Industrial Ni 4–6 Poor Po 2–5 0–3 Rich Ri 6, 8 6–8 Water World Wa 10 Vacuum Va 0 Planetoid Belt Presence Planetoid belts exist in many systems, and are mined by belters for ice, ore and other interesting things. To determine the pre sence of planetoid belts in a given star system, throw 4+ on 2 D6 for at least one planetoid belt to be present in the system. If planetoid belts are present, then the number of planetoid belts in the system is 1D6-3, minimum of 1. If the primary world of t he system is Size 0, then there’s at least one planetoid belt in the system automatically. Gas Giant Presence A star system may have one or more gas giant planets. The presence of a gas giant allows starships equipped with fuel scoops to refuel by skimmin g; this eliminates fuel cost for the vessel and increases profit. It also allows refueling at systems that do not have starports. Refueling in this fashion requires 1 D6 hours per 40 tons of fuel. Gas giants are relatively common. For each system throw 5+ on 2 D6 for at least one gas giant to be present in the system. If gas giants are present, then the number of gas giants in the system is 1 D6-2, minimum of 1. Bases Stellar systems may have bases for military forces, the navy, the scouts, or for other arms of interstellar government. Bases can help determine political boundaries with in a given region of space. An interstellar government will place bases along its borders to guard against aggression from rival states, or to control local systems. The presenc e of multiple bases within a few parsecs might indicate a contested border, or a mighty stronghold. While other bases may exist, the two primary bases are the Naval Base and the Scout Base. Naval Base A naval base is a supply depot, refueling station, rep air yard or fortress of the Navy. Naval vessels can obtain refined fuel and supplies here. If a world possesses a Class -A or Class -B starport, throw 8+ on 2 D6 to determine the presence of a naval base in the system.

Cepheus Engine SRD 175 Samardan Pre ss Scout Base A scout base or outpost offers refined fu el and supplies to scout ships. If a world does not possess a Class -E or Class -X starport, throw 7+ on 2 D6 to determine the presence of a scout base in the system. This roll suffers a DM -1 if the world has a Class -C starport, a DM -2 for a Cl ass-B starport and a DM -3 for a Class -A starport. Pirate Base A pirate base serves as a haven for interstellar pirates. If a world does not possess a Class -A starport or a naval base, throw 12+ on 2D6 to determine the presence of a pirate base in the sys tem. Base Codes The presence of one or more base s is designated on the hex map with a base code in the upper -left of the world hex. The Base Codes table identifies which note -worthy bases, if any, are present. Table: Base Codes Code Description A Naval Base and Scout Base/Outpost G Scout Base/Outpost and Pirate Base N Naval Base P Pirate Base S Scout Base/Outpost Travel Zones Most worlds are assumed to be civilized, or at least amenable to adventurers and other visitors. Some, however, are caught i n the throes of war, plagued by disease, or simply not ready for interstellar visitors. Such worlds are classified by travel zones to denote such status. In most cases, the Referee should indicate travel zones based on the information available. Two such z one types exist: amber and red. Amber Zone An Amber world has been deemed dangerous, and travelers are warned to be on their guard. Amber worlds are often undergoing upheaval or revolution, or else are naturally hazardous environments. A world with an Atm osphere of 10+, a government of 0, 7 or 10, or a Law Level of 0 or 9+ should be considered for Amber status. Red Zone Red worlds are interdicted and travel to them is forbidden. Interdictions are enforced by the Navy. Red zones can indicate that the world is too dangerous to allow visitors. The Referee assigns Red worlds at his discretion. Polities and World Allegiance Worlds may be independent, or part of a larger polity that spans a system or more. Polities range from loose confederations of a few world s with common trade or defense policies or cultural links, to vast star empires containing thousands of systems and trillions of citizens. Polity borders should be drawn on the map. Note that larger polities will usually have sub -domains, which should also be marked. Communications Routes and Trade Routes Within the subsector, governments will have established communications and trade routes connecting some (but not all) worlds. Messages between businesses, governments and people generally follow these ro utes.

Cepheus Engine SRD 176 Samardan Pre ss Communications routes should be carefully drawn so as to avoid making all parts of the subsector accessible; a subsector should have some areas as backwaters for exploration and adventure. Communications routes are drawn as single lines connecting h exes on the subsector grid. Trade routes link worlds that have strong commercial ties. Consult the Trade Route Worlds table – if any pair of worlds matching the two columns lay within four parsecs of each other, and there is a Jump –1 or Jump –2 route betwee n them, then mark a trade route connecting those two worlds. Table: Trade Route Worlds First End Point Second End Point Industrial or High Tech Asteroid, Desert, Ice Capped, Non -Industrial High Population or Rich Agricultural, Garden, Water World

Cepheus Engine SRD 187 Samardan Pre ss Table: Random Encounters D66 Encounter 11 Adventurers 12 Alien Starship Crew 13 Ambushing Brigands 14 Bandits 15 Beggars 16 Belters 21 Drunken Crew 22 Fugitives 23 Government Officials 24 Guards 25 Hunters and Guides 26 Law Enforcers on Patrol 31 Local Performers 32 Maint enance Robots 33 Merchants 34 Military Personnel on Leave 35 Noble with Retinue 36 Peasants 41 Political Dissident 42 Potential Patron 43 Public Demonstration 44 Religious Pilgrims 45 Reporters 46 Researchers 51 Riotous Mob 52 Security Troops 53 Servant Robots 54 Soldiers on Patrol 55 Street Vendors 56 Technicians 61 Thugs 62 Tourists 63 Traders 64 Vigilantes 65 Workers 66 Referee’s Choice Legal Encounters Legal encounters involve interactions with local planetary law enforcement. Some worlds have stricter laws than others. This is represented by the world's Law Level value. The higher the Law Level, the more likely that offworld visitors will be harassed by local law enforcement. When the Referee determines that a legal encounter happens, a local police officer will stop the adventurers and require identification. Further complications are at the Referee's discretion.

Cepheus Engine SRD 188 Samardan Pre ss Patron Encounters A patron is a non-player character that gives financial or other support to a person, o rganizatio n, cause, or activity. Referees often use patrons as a tool to attempt to engage player characters in adventures. Patron encounter s represent the beginning of an open -ended adventure idea, aka the hook. The patron provides the mission that serves as the ba sis for an adventure, as well as the reward for successfully completing it. Adventurers frequently seek out patrons as a source of employment. Less frequently, a patron may seek out the adventurers, based on their reputation. The Referee may roll a D66 on the Patron Encounters table or create one independently. Unique Patron Encounter tables might be created for specific worlds or adventures. Table: Patron Encounters D66 Potential Patron 11 Agent 12 Athlete 13 Barbarian 14 Belter 15 Broker 16 Bureauc rat 21 Celebrity 22 Colonist 23 Con Artist 24 Corporate Executive 25 Courier 26 Diplomat 31 Drifter 32 Educator 33 Entertainer 34 Financier 35 Fugitive 36 Hijacker 41 Hunter 42 Marine 43 Mercenary 44 Merchant 45 Navy 46 Noble 51 Physici an 52 Pirate 53 Politician 54 Rogue 55 Scientist 56 Scout 61 Smuggler 62 System Defense Officer 63 Technician 64 Terrorist 65 Tourist 66 Referee's Choice

Cepheus Engine SRD 193 Samardan Pre ss Solar flares: Solar flares release tremendous amounts of electromagnetic energy (including harmful ultraviol et rays and X -rays), as well as highly charged protons and electrons. Being caught in a solar flare receives 1 D6x100 rads every hour until the flares pass. See Chapter 11: Environments and Hazards for details on handling Radiation Exposure. Table: Starsh ip Encounters 2D6 Encounter Type 2 Alien Vessel 3 Derelict 4 Space Habitat 5 Astrogation 6 Space Junk 7 Merchant Vessel 8 Personal Vessel 9 Hostile Vessel 10 Military Vessel 11 Spacecraft 12 Referee's Choice Table: Alien Vessel Encounter Type 1D6 Encounter Type 1 Alien courier 2 Alien frontier trader 3 Alien merchant freighter 4 Alien military vessel 5 Alien raider 6 Alien research vessel Table: Astrogation Encounter Type 1D6 Encounter Type 1 Asteroid (inhabited) 2 Asteroid (uninhabit ed) 3 Comet 4 Interplanetary dust cloud 5 Micrometeorite storm 6 Solar flares Table: Derelict Encounter Type 1D6 Encounter Type 1 Escape pod or life boat 2 Merchant vessel 3 Military vessel 4 Personal vessel 5 Research vessel 6 Space habitat Table: Hostile Vessel Encounter Type

Cepheus Engine SRD 194 Samardan Pre ss 1D6 Encounter Type 1 Captured merchant vessel 2 Captured military vessel 3 Enemy military vessel 4 Raider 5 Ship in distress (false) 6 Ship in distress (true) Table: Merchant Vessel Encounter Type 1D6 Encounter Type 1 Frontier trader 2 Frontier trader 3 Merchant freighter 4 Merchant liner 5 Merchant trader 6 Merchant trader Table: Military Vessel Encounter Type 1D6 Encounter Type 1 Corvette 2 Destroyer 3 Patrol frigate 4 System defense boat 5 System monitor 6 Warship (1: Dreadnought; 2 -3: Heavy cruiser; 4 -6: Light cruiser) Table: Personal Vessel Encounter Type 1D6 Encounter Type 1 Asteroid miner 2 Courier 3 Research vessel 4 Survey vessel 5 Unusual ship 6 Yacht Table: Spacecraft Encounter T ype 1D6 Encounter Type 1 Cutter 2 Launch or life boat 3 Fighter 4 Pinnace 5 Ship's boat 6 Shuttle

Cepheus Engine SRD 195 Samardan Pre ss Table: Space Habitat Encounter Type 1D6 Encounter Type 1 Medical facility 2 Military facility 3 Orbital factory 4 Orbital habitat 5 Refueling s tation or spaceport 6 Research facility Table: Space Junk Encounter Type 1D6 Encounter Type 1 Astrogational buoy or beacon 2 Communications satellite 3 Debris from collision or attack 4 Defense satellite 5 Jettisoned cargo pod 6 Lost or abandoned equipment or garbage

Cepheus Engine SRD 205 Samardan Pre ss LEGAL The f ollowing is an important notice: This Product is derived from the Traveller System Reference Document and other Open Gaming Content made available by the Open Gaming License, and does not contain closed content from products published by either Mongoose Publishing or Far Future Enterprises. This Product is not affiliated with either Mongoose Publishing or Far Future Enterprises, and it makes no claim to or challenge to any trad emarks held by either entity. The use of the Traveller System Reference Document does not convey the endorsement of this Product by either Mongoose Publishing or Far Future Enterprises as a product of either of their product lines. Publishing Your Own Mat erials As you can see at the beginning of this System Reference Document, all of the text in this document is designated as Open Gaming Content, except for the titles of products published by Samardan Press, and the trademarks “Cepheus Engine” and “Samarda n Press”. This means you can copy whatever parts of the Cepheus Engine you want, add your own content, change the content around, and publish the result. Note that you will have to comply with the Open Gaming License, as reproduced at the end of this docum ent. If you don't mention any of the trademark elements, you don't need to do anything else. However, you can use the "Cepheus Engine" trademark, under certain circumstances, to indicate compatibility with this rules system. You have to follow the requirem ents of the Cepheus Engine Compatibility -Statement License (CSL), but if you do, you can state that your published material “is compatible with the rules of Cepheus Engine” or, “with the Cepheus Engine rules” or, “with the Cepheus Engine game.” Here are th ose requirements: The Cepheus Engine Compatibility -Statement License (CSL) 1. You must state on the first page where you mention Cepheus Engine that “Cepheus Engine and Samardan Press are the trademarks of Jason "Flynn" Kemp,” and that you are not affiliated with Jason "Flynn" Kemp or Samardan Press™. 2. If you’re using the license to commit legal fraud, you forfeit the right to continue using the license: specifically, if you are claiming compatibility with the rules of Cepheus Engine, the claim must not consti tute legal fraud, or fraud in the inducement, under the laws of the State of Texas. Note that this requirement is almost impossible to violate unintentionally —it’s largely intended to keep me out of trouble, not to restrict legitimate statements of compati bility. 3. You must comply with the terms of the OGL if the terms apply. 4. Your cover must include the words “House Rules” or “Variant Rules” or "Alternate Cepheus Engine Universe" near the title if the document is a full, free -standing game that includes modif ications. Feel free to contact the author if you wish to use a different form of disclaimer. 5. Selling a full version of this game with your house rules incorporated into it is perfectly permissible, but you may not sell an effectively unchanged copy of the rules for money. 6. If your document is a private house rules document, not being sold for profit or general use, you may scan and use artwork (including the cover) from the printed version, published in print under the title of Cepheus Engine Core Rules, pro vided that the cover contains the words “House Rules,” near the title, and that the artists are appropriately credited. 7. Your rights under this CSL cannot be revoked, and are perpetual, unless you breach the terms of the license, in which case your rights t erminate. 8. If you comply with the above, you may state that your resource is “ for use with the Cepheus Engine Core Rules ”, “compatible with the core rules of Cepheus Engine” or “with the Cepheus Engine Core Rules.” If you have questions about the license, feel free to contact the author.

Cepheus Engine SRD 206 Samardan Pre ss OPEN GAME LICENSE Version 1.0a The following text is the property of Wizards of the Coast, Inc. and is Copyright 2000 Wizards of the Coast, Inc (‘Wizards’). All Rights Reserved. 1. Definitions: (a)’Contributors’ means the copyright and/or trademark owners who have contributed Open Game Content; (b)’Derivative Material’ means copyrighted material including derivative works and translations (including into other computer languages), potation, modification, correction, additi on, extension, upgrade, improvement, compilation, abridgment or other form in which an existing work may be recast, transformed or adapted; (c) ‘Distribute’ means to reproduce, license, rent, lease, sell, broadcast, publicly display, transmit or otherwise distribute; (d)’Open Game Content’ means the game mechanic and includes the methods, procedures, processes and routines to the extent such content does not embody the Product Identity and is an enhancement over the prior art and any additional content clea rly identified as Open Game Content by the Contributor, and means any work covered by this License, including translations and derivative works under copyright law, but specifically excludes Product Identity. (e) ‘Product Identity’ means product and produc t line names, logos and identifying marks including trade dress; artifacts; creatures characters; stories, storylines, plots, themat ic elements, dialogue, incidents, language, artwork, symbols, designs, depictions, likenesses, formats, poses, concepts, themes and graphic, photographic and other visual or audio representations; names and descriptions of characters, spells, enchantments, personalities, teams, personas, likenesses and special abilities; places, locations, environments, creatures, equipment, ma gical or supernatural abilities or effects, logos, symbols, or graphic designs; and any other trademark or registered trademark clearly identified as Product identity by the owner of the Product Identity, and which specifically excludes the Open Game Conte nt; (f) ‘Trademark’ means the logos, names, mark, sign, motto, designs that are used by a Contributor to identify itself or its products or the associated products contributed to the Open Game License by the Contributor (g) ‘Use’, ‘Used’ or ‘Using’ means t o use, Distribute, copy, edit, format, modify, translate and otherwise create Derivative Material of Open Game Content. (h) ‘You’ or ‘Your’ means the licensee in terms of this agreement. 2. The License: This License applies to any Open Game Content that c ontains a notice indicating that the Open Game Content may only be Used under and in terms of this License. You must affix such a notice to any Open Game Content that you Use. No terms may be added to or subtracted from this License except as described by the License itself. No other terms or conditions may be applied to any Open Game Content distributed using this License. 3. Offer and Acceptance: By Using the Open Game Content You indicate Your acceptance of the terms of this License. 4. Grant and Consi deration: In consideration for agreeing to use this License, the Contributors grant You a perpetual, worldwide, royalty -free, non -exclusive license with the exact terms of this License to Use, the Open Game Content. 5. Representation of Authority to Contr ibute: If You are contributing original material as Open Game Content, You represent that Your Contributions are Your original creation and/or You have sufficient rights to grant the rights conveyed by this License. 6.Notice of License Copyright: You must update the COPYRIGHT NOTICE portion of this License to include the exact text of the COPYRIGHT NOTICE of any Open Game Content You are copying, modifying or distributing, and You must add the title, the copyright date, and the copyright holder’s name to t he COPYRIGHT NOTICE of any original Open Game Content you Distribute. 7. Use of Product Identity: You agree not to Use any Product Identity, including as an indication as to compatibility, except as expressly licensed in another, independent Agreement wit h the owner of each element of that Product Identity. You agree not to indicate compatibility or co -adaptability with any Trademark or Registered Trademark in conjunction with a work containing Open Game Content except as expressly licensed in another, ind ependent Agreement with the owner of such Trademark or Registered Trademark. The use of any Product Identity in Open Game Content does not constitute a challenge to the ownership of that Product Identity. The owner of any Product Identity used in Open Game Content shall retain all rights, title and interest in and to that Product Identity. 8. Identification: If you distribute Open Game Content You must clearly indicate which portions of the work that you are distributing are Open Game Content. 9. Updating the License: Wizards or its designated Agents may publish updated versions of this License. You may use any authorised version of this License to copy, modify and distribute any Open Game Content originally distributed under any version of this License. 10. Copy of this License: You MUST include a copy of this License with every copy of the Open Game Content You Distribute. 11. Use of Contributor Credits: You may not market or advertise the Open Game Content using the name of any Contributor unless You h ave written permission from the Contributor to do so.

Cepheus Engine SRD 207 Samardan Pre ss 12. Inability to Comply: If it is impossible for You to comply with any of the terms of this License with respect to some or all of the Open Game Content due to statute, judicial order, or governmental regulation then You may not Use any Open Game Material so affected. 13. Termination: This License will terminate automatically if You fail to comply with all terms herein and fail to cure such breach within 30 days of becoming aware of the breach. All su blicenses shall survive the termination of this License. 14. Reformation: If any provision of this License is held to be unenforceable, such provision shall be reformed only to the extent necessary to make it enforceable. 15. COPYRIGHT NOTICE Open Game License v 1.0a Copyright 2000, Wizards of the Coast, Inc. High Guard System Reference Document Copyright © 2008, Mongoose Publishing. Mercenary System Reference Document Copyright © 2008, Mongoose Publishing. Modern System Reference Document Copyright 2002 -2004, Wizards of the Coast, Inc.; Authors Bill Slavicsek, Jeff Grubb, Rich Redman, Charles Ryan, Eric Cagle, David Noonan, Stan!, Christopher Perkins, Rodney Thompson, and JD Wiker, based on material by Jonat han Tweet, Monte Cook, Skip Williams, Richard Baker, Peter Adkison, Bruce R. Cordell, John Tynes, Andy Collins, and JD Wiker. Swords & Wizardry Core Rules, Copyright 2008, Matthew J. Finch System Reference Document, Copyright 2000, Wizards of the Coast, I nc.; Authors Jonathan Tweet, Monte Cook, Skip Williams, based on original material by E. Gary Gygax and Dave Arneson. T20 - The Traveller’s Handbook Copyright 2002, Quiklink Interactive, Inc. Traveller is a trademark of Far Future Enterprises and is used u nder license. Traveller System Reference Document Copyright © 2008, Mongoose Publishing. Traveller is © 2008 Mongoose Publishing. Traveller and related logos, character, names, and distinctive likenesses thereof are trademarks of Far Future Enterprises unl ess otherwise noted. All Rights Reserved. Mongoose Publishing Ltd Authorized User. Cepheus Engine System Reference Document, Copyright © 2016 Samardan Press; Author Jason "Flynn" Kemp